<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poetry">
<div class="stanza">
<div class="verse">"A springy motion in her gait,<br></div>
<div class="verse">A rising step, did indicate<br></div>
<div class="verse">Of pride and joy no common rate<br></div>
<div class="verse i4">That flush'd her spirit:<br></div>
<div class="verse">I know not by what name beside<br></div>
<div class="verse">I shall it call: if 'twas not pride,<br></div>
<div class="verse">It was a joy to that allied<br></div>
<div class="verse i4">She did inherit.<br></div>
</div>
<div class="verse indent2" style="letter-spacing:2em">*****<br></div>
<div class="stanza">
<div class="verse">She was trained in Nature's school,<br></div>
<div class="verse i4">Nature had blest her.<br></div>
<div class="verse">A waking eye, a prying mind,<br></div>
<div class="verse">A heart that stirs, is hard to bind:<br></div>
<div class="verse">A hawk's keen sight ye cannot blind,<br></div>
<div class="verse i4">Ye could not Hester."<br></div>
</div>
<p class="citation"><span class="smcap">Charles Lamb.</span></p>
</div>
</div>

<h2><a name="CHAPTER_I" id="CHAPTER_I">CHAPTER I.</a></h2>

<h3>VERNON'S.</h3>


<p>The Banking House of the Vernons was known
through all the Home Counties as only second to
the Bank of England in stability and strength.
That is to say, the people who knew about such
matters, the business people, the professional classes,
and those who considered themselves to be acquainted
with the world, allowed that it ought to
be considered second: but this opinion was not
shared by the greater proportion of its clients, the
shopkeepers in Redborough and the adjacent towns,
the farmers of a wide district, and all the smaller
people whose many united littles make up so much
wealth. To them Vernon's bank was the emblem of
stability, the impersonation of solid and substantial
wealth. It had risen to its height of fame under
John Vernon, the grandfather of the present head of<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_2" id="Page_2">[Pg 2]</a></span>
the firm, though it had existed for two or three
generations before him. But John Vernon was one
of those men in whose hands everything turns to
gold. What the special gift is which determines
this it is difficult to tell, but there can be little
doubt that it is a special gift, just as it is a
particular genius which produces a fine picture or
a fine poem. There were wiser men than he, and
there were men as steady to their work and as
constantly in their place, ready for all the claims of
business, but not one other in whose hands everything
prospered in the same superlative way. His
investments always answered, his ships always came
home, and under his influence the very cellars of the
banking-house, according to the popular imagination,
filled with gold. At one period of his career a panic
seized the entire district, and there was a run upon
the bank, by which it was evident anybody else
must, nay, ought, to have been ruined; but John
Vernon was not ruined. It was understood afterwards
that he himself allowed that he did not
understand how he had escaped, and nobody else
could understand it: but he did escape, and as a
natural consequence became stronger and richer,
and more universally credited than ever. His son
after him had not the same genius for money, but
at least he had the genius for keeping what he had
got, which is next best.</p>

<p>Edward Vernon, however, was not so fortunate in
his family as in his affairs. He had two sons, one of
whom died young, leaving a little daughter to be<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_3" id="Page_3">[Pg 3]</a></span>
brought up by her grandfather; the other "went
wrong." Oh, never-ending family tragedy, never
ending, still beginning, the darkest anguish that
exists in the world! The younger son went wrong,
and died also in his father's lifetime, leaving a
helpless little family of children, and a poor wife
stupefied with trouble. She did her best, poor soul,
to bring up her boy to ways the very opposite of
those in which his father had stumbled and fallen,
and it was supposed that he would marry his cousin
Catherine Vernon, and thus unite once more all the
money and prestige of the house. He too was John
Vernon, and resembled the golden great-grandfather,
and great things were hoped of him. He entered
the bank in old Mr. Vernon's time, and gave every
promise of being a worthy successor as long as the
senior partner, the head of the house, lived. But
when the old gentleman died and John Vernon
became in his turn the head of the house, there
very soon appeared signs of change. In the first
place the marriage with his cousin never came to
pass; things had seemed to promise fairly so long as
the grandfather with whom she lived was alive. But
after, there was an immediate cooling of sentiment.
Whose fault this was nobody knew. She said
nothing on the subject even to her dearest friends;
nor did he say anything; but he laughed and waved
aside all questions as a man who "could an if he
would"&mdash;&mdash;. His mother, for her part, said a great
deal. She ran between them like an excited hen,
shaking her tail-feathers and cackling violently.<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_4" id="Page_4">[Pg 4]</a></span>
What did they mean by it? What was it for?
She asked her son how he could forget that if
Catherine's money went out of the business it would
make the most extraordinary difference? and she
bade Catherine remember that it would be almost
dishonest to enrich another family with money
which the Vernons had toiled for. Catherine, who
was not by any means an ordinary girl, smiled upon
her, perhaps a little sadly, and entered into no explanations.
But her son, as was natural, scoffed at
his mother. "What should you know about the
business?" he said. Poor Mrs. Vernon thought she
had heard enough of it to understand it, or at least
to understand the intentions of those who understood
it. But what is the use of a mother's remonstrances?
The new generation will please itself and take its
way. She scolded and wept for years after, poor
soul, in vain, and yet could never learn that it was
in vain, but began anew day after day weeping,
entreating, remonstrating, falling into nervous crises
of passion a hundred and a hundred times over.
How much better for her to have held her tongue!
but how could she help it? She was not of that
placid and patient nature which can be wise. And
gradually things began to go badly with John. He
married a young lady belonging to a county family,
but with no money to keep up her pretensions. He
had his stables full of horses and his house full of
company. "What is it all to come to?" cried his
poor, anxious, angry, disappointed, despairing mother,
seeking opportunities to have a few words with him,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_5" id="Page_5">[Pg 5]</a></span>
to speak to him seriously, to remind him of his duty.
To be sure she did a great deal more harm than
good. She drew many a blow upon herself which
she might have escaped had she been content to
allow that his life had passed far beyond her guidance;
but the poor lady would not be taught. And
it was quite true what John Vernon said. It would
take a long time, he told her, before a few horses
and pleasant company would affect Vernon's bank.
As the head of that establishment he was expected
to be hospitable, and keep almost open house; the
country which trusted in him knew he could afford
it. The Redborough people went further, and liked
to see the confidence with which he spent his money.
What could that do to Vernon's? He had never
lived up to his income yet, he believed. So he told
his mother, who was never satisfied, and went on till
the day of her death always seeking a few words
with him&mdash;an opportunity of speaking seriously to
her son. Poor mother! nothing went very well
with her; perhaps she was not clever either at
managing her children or her money. The partisans
of the Vernons said so at least; they said so of all
the wives that were not Vernons, but interlopers,
always working harm. They said so also of Mrs.
John, and there his mother thought they were not
far wrong. But none of her children turned out
very satisfactorily; the girls married badly; Edward,
her younger son, went into the Church, and never
was more than a vicar, and their money matters
would not go right. Certainly she was not a<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_6" id="Page_6">[Pg 6]</a></span>
fortunate woman. But she died, happily for her,
before anything material happened to realise her
alarms in respect to John.</p>

<p>It is astonishing how money grows when it is in
the way of growing&mdash;when it has got the genuine
impulse and rolls every kindred atom near it, according
to some occult law of attraction, into itself.
But just as wonderfully as money grows does it melt
away when the other&mdash;the contrary process&mdash;has
begun. John Vernon was quite right in saying that
the bank justified, nay, almost demanded, a certain
amount of expenditure from its chief partner. And
he was more, much more, than its chief partner.
Catherine, though she was as deeply interested in
it as himself, took no responsibility whatever&mdash;how
should she, a girl who knew as much about money
as her pony did? She took less interest, indeed,
than in ordinary circumstances she would have done,
for there was certainly something, whatever it might
be, which had interrupted the natural intercourse
between the two cousins. They were not at ease
with each other like brother and sister, as everything
suggested they ought to have been&mdash;not sufficiently
at ease to consider their mutual interests together,
as partners ought to have done. This, one of them
at least thought, would have been ridiculous in any
case. When his lawyers asked what Catherine
thought on this or that subject, he laughed in
their faces.</p>

<p>"What should she think? What should she
know? Of course she leaves all that to me,"<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_7" id="Page_7">[Pg 7]</a></span>
he said. "How can a girl understand banking
business?"</p>

<p>But this did not satisfy the respectable firm of
solicitors who advised the banker.</p>

<p>"Miss Vernon is not a girl any longer," said Mr.
Pounce, who was its head; upon which John Vernon
laughed, one of those offensive laughs with which a
coarse-minded man waves the banner of his sex
over an unmarried woman.</p>

<p>"No," he said, "Catherine's growing an old maid.
She must look alive if she means to get a husband."</p>

<p>Mr. Pounce was not a sentimentalist, and no doubt
laughed sometimes too at the unfortunate women
who had thus failed in the object of their life; but
he respected Miss Vernon, and he was very doubtful
of her cousin.</p>

<p>"Husband or no husband, I think she ought to be
consulted," he said.</p>

<p>"Oh, I will take Catherine in my own hands,"
was the cousin's reply.</p>

<p>And thus life went on, very gay, fast, amusing,
and expensive on one side; very quiet and uneventful
on the other. John Vernon built himself a grand
new house, in which there were all the latest improvements
and scientific luxuries, which the most
expensive upholsterers filled with the most costly
furniture, and for which the skilfullest gardeners all
but created ready-made trees and shrubberies. He
filled it with fine company&mdash;names which the clerks
at the bank felt were a credit to the establishment,
and which the townsfolk looked upon with admiring<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_8" id="Page_8">[Pg 8]</a></span>
awe: and there was nothing in the county to equal
Mrs. John Vernon's dresses and diamonds. What
is all that to a great bank, gathering money every
hour?&mdash;nothing! Even Mr. Pounce acknowledged
this. Personal extravagance, as long as it is merely
hospitality and show, must go a very long way
indeed before it touches the great revenue of such
a business. It was not the diamonds nor the feasts
that they were afraid of. But to be lavish with
money is a dangerous fault with a man who is a
business man. It is a very common sin, but there
is nothing more perilous. In Manchester or Liverpool,
where they turn over a fortune every day,
perhaps this large habit of sowing money about
does not matter. People there are accustomed to
going up and down. Bankruptcy, even, does not
mean the end of the world in these regions. But a
banker in a country town, who has all the money of
a district in his hands, should not get into this
reckless way. His clients are pleased&mdash;up to a
certain limit. But when once the first whisper of
suspicion has been roused it flies fast, and the panic
with which rural depositors rush upon a bank which
has awakened the ghost of an apprehension, is even
more cruel and unreflecting than other panics. It
went on a long time, and where it was that the first
suggestion came from, nobody ever knew. Probably
it did not come from any one&mdash;it was in the air, it
struck two people, all at once, talking to each other,
and the electricity of the contact found a single
syllable of utterance. When that was done, all was<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_9" id="Page_9">[Pg 9]</a></span>
done. Everybody had been waiting for this involuntary
signal; and when it came, it flew like lightning
through all Redborough, and out into the roads and
lanes&mdash;to distant farmhouses, into the rectories and
vicarages, even to the labourer's cottage. "It's said
as Vernon's bank's a-going to break," the ploughmen
in the fields said to each other. It did not matter
much to them; and perhaps they were not sorry that
the farmer, who grew fat (they thought) on their
toil, should feel that he was also human. The
farmers had something of the same feeling in respect
to their landlords, but could not indulge it for the
furious terror that took possession of themselves.
Vernon's bank! Safer than the Bank of England,
was what they had all said exultingly. Very few of
them had sufficient command of themselves to wait
now and inquire into it and see how far the panic
was well founded. To wait would have been to
leave the chance of salvation to other men.</p>

<p>Mrs. John Vernon was considered very refined and
elegant according to the language of the day, a young
lady with many accomplishments. But it was the
fashion of the time to be unpractical just as it is the
fashion of our time that women should understand
business and be ready for any emergency. To wear
your hair in a high loose knot on the top of your
head, with ringlets straying down your cheek, and
across the always uncovered whiteness of your
shoulders, and to sing the songs of Mr. Haynes
Bayley, "Oh no, we never mention her," or "The
Soldier's Tear"&mdash;could anything be more entirely<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_10" id="Page_10">[Pg 10]</a></span>
inconsistent with business habits? Mrs. John would
have considered it a slight to the delicacy of her
mind to have been supposed to know anything
about the bank; and when the head clerk demanded
an audience at an unseasonable hour one summer
evening she was entirely taken aback.</p>

<p>"Me! do you mean that it is me Mr. Rule
wants to see?" she asked of the servant in consternation.</p>

<p>"He did ask for master, ma'am," said the man,
"but as master's from home he said he must see
my lady. He looks very flustered. I'll say that for
him," he added.</p>

<p>To be sure William had heard the whisper in
the air, and was more or less gratified that Mr.
Rule should be flustered; but as for his lady, she
saw no connection whatever between Mr. Rule's
excitement and herself.</p>

<p>"I do not see what good I can do him, William;
and it's not an hour at which I ever receive people.
I am sure I don't know what he can want with me."</p>

<p>"It's business, I think, ma'am," said the servant,
with a little eagerness. He wanted immensely
himself to know what it was, and it did not occur
to him as possible that his mistress, so much more
interested than he, should be without anxiety or
concern.</p>

<p>"Business!" said Mrs. John, "what do I
know about business? However," she added, "if
he is so desirous, perhaps you had better show him
up. Your master is always pleased when I pay a<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_11" id="Page_11">[Pg 11]</a></span>
little attention to the clerks. He says it does
good."</p>

<p>"Yes, ma'am," said William.</p>

<p>Being a reasonable human creature he was
touched in spite of himself by the extraordinary
sight of this poor, fine lady, sitting in her short
sleeves on the edge of the volcano, and knowing
nothing about it. It was too bad of master, William
thought, if so be&mdash;&mdash; To leave the poor lady
entirely in the dark so that she did not know no
more than a baby what the clerk could want with
her. William speculated, too, on his own circumstances
as he went down stairs. If so be&mdash;&mdash; It
was a good place, and he would be sorry to lose it.
But he remembered that somebody had said the
Sandersons were looking out for a butler.</p>

<p>"Mrs. Vernon will see you, sir," he said in the
midst of these thoughts; and Mr. Rule followed him
eagerly up stairs.</p>

<p>But what could Mrs. John do? Her dress was
spotted muslin, as most dresses were in those days;
it was cut rather low on the shoulders, though she
was not dressed for company. She had pretty little
ringlets falling upon her cheeks, and short sleeves,
and a band round her waist with a shining clasp.
She was considered brilliant in conversation, and
sang, "We met, 'twas in a crowd," and the songs
previously mentioned, with so much feeling that
people had been known to weep as they listened.
The clerk had heard of all these accomplishments,
and as he hurried in, his eye was caught by the harp<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_12" id="Page_12">[Pg 12]</a></span>
in its corner, which was also one of the fashions of
the time. He could not help being a little overawed
by it, notwithstanding his dreadful anxiety.
Poor lady! the thought passed through his mind as
similar thoughts had passed through William's&mdash;Would
all this be sold away from her? White
muslin dresses with low necks have the advantage
that they quite seem to separate their wearers from
everyday life. We have no doubt that the dying
out of chivalry, and the way in which women nowadays
insist on doing their own business, and most
likely other people's too, is in great part to be put
down to high dresses and long sleeves. In these
habiliments a lady looks not so very much different
from other people. She feels herself free to go into
common life. But Mrs. John sat there helpless,
ignorant, quite composed and easy in her mind, with
pretty feet in sandalled slippers peeping from under
her dress. Mr. Rule had time for all this distressed,
regretful sympathy before he could stammer out in
a hurry his anxious question&mdash;or rather his hope&mdash;that
Mr. Vernon would be home to-morrow&mdash;early?</p>

<p>"I am sure I don't know," said Mrs. John. "It
would be scarcely worth his while to go away if he
was to be back so soon. He said perhaps to-morrow,
but more likely next week."</p>

<p>"Next week!" cried Mr. Rule; "then he may
just as well stay away altogether; it will then be
too late."</p>

<p>"Dear me!" said Mrs. John, politely, willing to<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_13" id="Page_13">[Pg 13]</a></span>
show an interest; but she did not know what more
to say.</p>

<p>"Perhaps you know where he is, ma'am?" said the
anxious clerk: for this was the time when people
said ma'am. "We might send an express after him.
If he were here, things might still be tided over.
Excuse me, Mrs. Vernon, but if you can give me
any information&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Dear me," said Mrs. John, "my husband was
going to London, I think. Is it about business, or
anything I may know?"</p>

<p>"All the world will know to-morrow," cried the
agitated clerk, "unless you can give me some assistance.
I don't like to trouble a lady, but what can I
do? Mrs. Vernon, to-morrow is market day, and
as sure as that day comes if he is not here to make
some provision for it, we shall have a run on the
bank."</p>

<p>"A run on the bank!" said Mrs. John, dismayed.
"What does that mean?"</p>

<p>"It means that we shall have to pay every note
that is presented us in gold: and that everybody
will rush upon us with our notes in their hands: and
all the people who have deposit accounts will withdraw
their money. It means Ruin," said Mr. Rule,
very much flustered indeed, wiping the perspiration
from his brow. He had an account himself, and a
considerable sum to his credit. Oh, the fool he had
been to let it lie there instead of investing it! but
then, he had been waiting for a good investment, and
in the meantime, Vernon's was as safe, safer than<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_14" id="Page_14">[Pg 14]</a></span>
the Bank of England. He had believed that till
to-day.</p>

<p>Mrs. John sat looking at him with bewildered
eyes.</p>

<p>"I don't understand," she said. "The bank of
course is for that, isn't it? I never understand how
you do it," she added, with a little of the sprightliness
for which she was distinguished. "It has
always been a mystery to me what good it can do
you to take all the trouble of paying people's bills
for them, and locking up their money, and having
all that responsibility; but I cannot deny that it
seems to answer," she concluded with a little
simper.</p>

<p>The harassed clerk looked at her with a pity that
was almost tragic. If she had not been so handsome
and so fine, and surrounded with all these
luxuries, it is very likely he would have been
impatient, and considered her a fool.</p>

<p>He replied gently&mdash;</p>

<p>"I dare say, ma'am, it is difficult for you to form
an idea of business; but I am almost forgetting,
sitting talking to you, how dreadfully serious it is.
If I knew where Mr. Vernon was, I would send a
post-chaise directly. We are lost if he is not here.
They will say&mdash;God knows what they may not say.
For God's sake, ma'am, tell me how I am to find
him?"</p>

<p>"Indeed, Mr. Rule, I am very, very sorry. If I
had known! but I rather encouraged him to go. He
was looking so poorly. He was going to town, I am<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_15" id="Page_15">[Pg 15]</a></span>
sure&mdash;first: and then perhaps to Bath: or he might
go across to France. He has been talking of that.
France&mdash;yes, I suggested it. He has never been on
the Continent. But now I think of it, I don't think
he will go there, for he said he might be home
to-morrow&mdash;though more likely next week."</p>

<p>"It seems very vague," said Mr. Rule, looking at
her with a steady look that began to show a gleam of
suspicion; but this was entirely out of place. Mrs.
John answered lightly without any perception even
of what he could mean.</p>

<p>"Oh yes, it was vague! it is so much better not
to be tied down. I told him he ought to take me;
but it was settled in a hurry, he was feeling so
poorly."</p>

<p>"Then he has forsaken us!" cried the clerk in a
terrible voice, which shook even her obtuse perceptions.
She gazed at him with a little glow of
anger.</p>

<p>"Forsaken you! Dear me, surely a little holiday
never can matter. Why, the servants could go on
without me for a time. It would never come into
Mr. Vernon's head that you could not manage by
yourselves even for a single day."</p>

<p>The clerk did not answer; it was all such a terrible
muddle of ignorance and innocence, and perhaps of
deep and deliberate guilt. But anyhow, there was
the result beyond all uncertainty. The bank must
come down. Vernon's, which it had taken the work
of generations to build up; Vernon's, which was
safer than the Bank of England. Mr. Rule had been<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_16" id="Page_16">[Pg 16]</a></span>
a clerk there, man and boy, for about twenty years.
He had been one of old Mr. Vernon's staff. He had
a pride in the bank as if it had been his own. To
give up Vernon's to destruction seemed more than
giving himself up. But what could the clerks do
without the principal? A lieutenant may fight his
ship if the captain fails, or a subaltern replace his
leader, but what can the clerks do without the head
of the establishment? And he had no authority to
act even if he had known how to act; and every two
or three minutes there would come across him a
poignant recollection of his own deposit. Oh, the
Alnaschar hopes he had built upon that little
fortune, the ways in which it was to serve him!
He tried honestly, however, to put it away from
his mind.</p>

<p>"We could have done well enough on an ordinary
occasion," he said, "and Mr. Vernon generally settles
everything before he goes; but I thought he was
only absent for the day. Mrs. Vernon," he cried,
suddenly, "can't you help us? can't you help us?
It will be ruin for you too."</p>

<p>She stared at him for a moment without speaking,
and then&mdash;</p>

<p>"You make me quite wretched. I don't understand.
I have only a little money in the house.
Would that do any good?" she said.</p>

<p>"How much have you?" said the clerk in his
trouble.</p>

<p>She ran to a pretty ornamental desk and opened
it nervously.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_17" id="Page_17">[Pg 17]</a></span></p>

<p>"I dare say there may be about twenty pounds,"
she said.</p>

<p>He laughed loudly, harshly, a laugh that seemed
to echo through the large, unoccupied room.</p>

<p>"If it were twenty thousand it might do something,"
he said.</p>

<p>"Sir!" said Mrs. John Vernon, standing in a fine
attitude of displeasure by her desk, holding it open
with one hand. She looked like a picture by Sir
Thomas Lawrence, her scarf, for she wore a scarf,
hanging half off her pretty white shoulders, caught
upon one equally white arm, her ringlets waving on
her cheek. His laugh was rude, and then he was
only a clerk. She was all angry scorn from the high
knot of brown hair on the top of her head to the
point of her sandalled shoe.</p>

<p>Poor Mr. Rule was as penitent as man could
be. He was shocked beyond measure by his
own brutality. He had forgotten himself&mdash;and
before a lady! He made the most abject
apologies.</p>

<p>"But my interest in the bank will, I hope,
be some excuse. I feel half distracted," he
said; and he added, as he backed out at the
door with painful bows, "Perhaps, ma'am, if you
can think of any means of communicating with
Mr. Vernon, you would let me know; or I will
call later, if we could send an express; nothing
is too much for the chance of having him back
to-morrow."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_18" id="Page_18">[Pg 18]</a></span></p>

<p>"Well," said the lady, "you are strange managers,
I must say, that cannot get on without my husband
one day."</p>

<p>"It is not that, ma'am; it is not that."</p>

<p>"I don't know what it is. I begin to think it is
only making a fuss," Mrs. John said.</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_19" id="Page_19">[Pg 19]</a></span></p>




<h2><a name="CHAPTER_II" id="CHAPTER_II">CHAPTER II.</a></h2>

<h3>MISS CATHERINE.</h3>


<p>Poor Mr. Rule rushed out into the night in a
state of despair. It was a summer night, and the
streets of Redborough were still full of the murmur
of life and movement. He came down from the
slope on which Mr. John Vernon's grand new house
was situated, into the town, turning over everything
that it was possible to do. Should he go to the Old
Bank, the life-long rival of Vernon's, and ask their
help to pull through? Even such a humiliation he
would have endured had there been any chance of
success. Should he go to the agent of the Bank of
England? He could not but feel that it was quite
doubtful whether between them they could make up
enough to meet the rush he expected; and were
they likely to do it? Would not the first question
be, "Where is Mr. Vernon?" And where was Mr.
Vernon? Perhaps gone to Bath; perhaps to France,
his wife said. Why should he go to France without
letting any one at the bank know, saying he was<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_20" id="Page_20">[Pg 20]</a></span>
only to be absent for a day? There was no telegraph
in those days, and if he confided Mr. Vernon's story
to the other banks, what would they think of him?
They would say that Vernon was mad, or that he
had&mdash;gone away. There could be no doubt of what
they would say. Rule was faithful to his old service,
and to the honour of the house which had trained
him. He would say nothing about France or Bath.
He would allow it to be understood that Mr. Vernon
had gone to London to get the assistance necessary,
and would come back in a post-chaise before the
offices were open in the morning. And perhaps, he
said to himself, perhaps it was so. God grant it
might be so! Very likely he had not thought it
necessary to enter into the matter to a lady. Poor
thing, with her twenty pounds! that showed how
much she knew of business; but it was very high-minded
and innocent of her to offer all she had. It
showed there was at least no harm in her thoughts.
It gave a momentary ease to the clerk's mind to
think that perhaps this was what Mr. Vernon must
mean. He must have known for some time how
badly things were going, and who could tell that the
sudden expedition of which he had made so little,
only saying when he left the bank the day before
"I shall not be here to-morrow," who could tell that
it was not to help to surmount the crisis, that he
had gone away? Rule turned towards his own
house under the solace of this thought, feeling that
anyhow it was better to get a night's rest, and be
strong for whatever was to happen to-morrow. It<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_21" id="Page_21">[Pg 21]</a></span>
would be a miserable to-morrow if Mr. Vernon did
not bring help. Not only the bank that would go,
but so many men with families that would be thrown
upon the world. God help them! and that money
which stood to his own credit, that balance of which
two or three days before he had been so proud, to
see it standing in his name on those well-kept
beautiful books! All this hanging upon the chance
that Mr. Vernon might have gone to town to get
money! No, he could not go in, and sit down at the
peaceful table where Mrs. Rule perhaps would be
hemming a cambric ruffle for his shirt, or plaiting it
delicately with her own fingers, a thing no laundress
could do to please her&mdash;and the children learning
their lessons. He felt sure that he could not rest;
he would only make her anxious, and why should
she be made anxious as long as he could keep it
from her. It is difficult to say how it was that the
first suggestion of a new possibility took hold of Mr.
Rule's mind. He turned away when he was within a
stone's throw of his own house, saying to himself that
he could not go in, that it was impossible, and walked
in the opposite direction, where he had not gone
far until he came in sight of the bank, that centre of
so many years' hard work, that pride of Redborough,
and of everybody connected with it. Vernon's! To
think that Ruin should be possible, that so dark a
shadow could hover over that sacred place. What
would old Mr. Vernon have said, he who received it
from his father and handed it down always flourishing,
always prosperous to&mdash;not to his son. If his<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_22" id="Page_22">[Pg 22]</a></span>
son had lived, the eldest one, not he who had gone
wrong, but the eldest, who was John too, called
after his grandfather, he who was the father of&mdash;&mdash; It
was at this point that Mr. Rule came to a dead stop,
and then after a pause wheeled right round, and
without saying another word to himself walked
straight up Wilton Street, which as everybody knows
was quite out of his way.</p>

<p>The father of &mdash;&mdash; Yes, indeed, indeed, and that
was true! The recollection which called forth this
fervour of affirmation was a pleasant one. All the
youth of Redborough at one time had been in love
with Catherine Vernon. The bank clerks to a man
adored her. When she used to come and go with
her grandfather&mdash;and she did so constantly, bringing
him down in the morning in her pony carriage,
calling for him in the afternoon, running in in the
middle of the day to see that the old gentleman had
taken his biscuits and his wine&mdash;she walked over
their hearts as she crossed the outer office, but so
lightly, so smoothly, that the hearts were only
thrilled, not crushed by her footfall, so firm and
swift, but so airy as it was. She knew them all in
the office, and would give her hand to the head
clerk, and send a friendly glance all round, unaware
of the harm she was doing to the hapless young
men. But after all it was not harm. It was a
generous love they felt for her, like the love of
chivalry for a lady unapproachable. That young
princess was not for them. None of them grew
mad with foolish hopes, but they thought of her as<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_23" id="Page_23">[Pg 23]</a></span>
they never thought of any one else. Mr. Rule was
at the end of Wilton Street, just where it meanders
out towards the edge of the common, before he took
breath, and began to ask himself what Miss Vernon
could do for him. Was not one lady enough to
appeal to? She whom he had already seen had
nothing for him&mdash;no help, no advice, not a suggestion
even. And yet she was more closely connected with
the bank than Catherine Vernon, who had disappeared
from all visible connection with it at her
grandfather's death, notwithstanding that a great
deal of her money was in it, and that she had in
fact a right to be consulted as a partner. So it had
been settled, it was said, by the old man in his will.
But she had never, so far as anybody knew, taken up
this privilege. She had never come to the bank,
never given a sign of having any active interest in
it. What then could she be expected to do? What
could she do even if she wished to help them? Mr.
Rule was aware that there was no very cordial
feeling between her cousin's house and hers. They
were friends, perfectly good friends, but they were
not cordial. While he turned over these thoughts
in his mind, however, he walked on steadily and
quickly without the least hesitation in his step.
There was even a sort of exhilarated excitement in
him, a sentiment quite different from that with
which he had been disconsolately straying about,
and painfully turning over possibilities, or rather
impossibilities. Perhaps it was a half romantic
pleasure in the idea of speaking to Miss Vernon<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_24" id="Page_24">[Pg 24]</a></span>
again, but really there was something besides that, a
sense of satisfaction in finding a new and capable
mind to consult with at least, if no more.</p>

<p>Miss Vernon lived in the house which her grandfather
had lived in and his father before him. To
reach it you had to make your way through the
delta of little streets into which Wilton Street ran,
and across a corner of the common. The Grange
was an old house with dark red gables appearing
out of the midst of a clump of trees. In winter
you saw the whole mass of it, chiefly old bricks,
though these were thrown up and made picturesque
by the fact that the oldest part was in grey stone.
Broad large Elizabethan windows glimmered, lighted
up, through the thick foliage this evening; for by
this time the summer night was beginning to get
dark, and a good deal too late for a visit. Mr. Rule
thought as he knocked at the door that it was very
likely she would not see him. But this was not the
case. When he sent in his name as the head clerk
at the bank he was received immediately, and shown
into the room with the Elizabethan windows where
she was sitting. By this time she was of mature
years, and naturally much changed from the young
girl he had known. He had been one of the young
clerks in the outer office, whom she would recognise
with a friendly smiling look, and a nod of her head
all round. Now, however, Miss Vernon came up to
him, and held out her hand to Mr. Rule. "You
need not have sent me word who you were," she said
with a smile. "I knew quite well who you were.<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_25" id="Page_25">[Pg 25]</a></span>
I never forget faces nor names. You have not come
to me at this time of night on a mere visit of civility.
Don't be afraid to tell me at once whatever there
may be to say."</p>

<p>"From the way you speak, ma'am," said Mr. Rule,
"I conclude that you have heard some of the wicked
reports that are flying about?"</p>

<p>"That is exactly what I want to know," she said,
with all her old vivacity. "Are they wicked
reports?"</p>

<p>"A report is always wicked," said Mr. Rule
sententiously, "which is likely to bring about the
evil it imagines."</p>

<p>"Ah!" she cried. "Then it is no further gone
than that; and yet it is as far gone as that?" she
added, looking anxiously in his face.</p>

<p>"Miss Vernon," said Rule solemnly, "I expect a
run upon the bank to-morrow."</p>

<p>"Good God!" she said, clasping her hands; which
was not a profane exclamation, but the kind of half-conscious
appeal which nature makes instinctively.
"But you have made all preparations? Surely you
can meet that."</p>

<p>He shook his head solemnly. The credit of the
bank was so much to him that when thus face to
face with the event he dreaded, poor Rule could
not articulate anything, and the water stood in his
eyes.</p>

<p>"Good God!" she said again: but her face was
not awe-stricken; it was that of a soldier springing
instantly to the alert, rallying all his resources at the<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_26" id="Page_26">[Pg 26]</a></span>
first word of danger; "but you don't mean to say
that my cousin&mdash;does not John know this? They
say everybody knows these things before the person
concerned. Why, why did you not warn him,
Mr. Rule?"</p>

<p>Rule shook his head.</p>

<p>"It isn't possible that he could have been ignorant.
How could he be ignorant, ma'am? God
knows I have not a word to say against Mr. Vernon&mdash;but
to think he should forsake us in our moment
of trial!"</p>

<p>"Forsake you!" A sudden flush flew over Miss
Vernon's face&mdash;a spark shot out of her eyes. Indignation
and yet doubt was in her face. "That is
not possible," she cried, holding her head high; and
then she said anxiously, "Mr. Rule, tell me what
you mean?"</p>

<p>"I dare say it is the falsity of appearances," said
poor Rule. "I am sure I hope so. I hope Mr.
Vernon has gone away to get help, personally: you
can do that so much better than writing: and that
he may be back in time to-morrow."</p>

<p>"Has he gone away?" she said in a low tone.</p>

<p>"Unfortunately, Miss Vernon&mdash;I can't help saying
unfortunately, for it paralyses everybody else. We
can do nothing at the bank. But I cling to the
hope that he will be back before the bank is opened.
Oh, yes, I cling to the hope. Without that&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Everything will be lost?"</p>

<p>"Everything!" cried he, who was so proud of being
the head clerk at Vernon's, with tears in his eyes.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_27" id="Page_27">[Pg 27]</a></span></p>

<p>And then there was a pause. For a minute or
two not a word was said. The daughter of the
house was as much overcome by the thought as was
its faithful servant. At last she said faintly, but
firmly&mdash;</p>

<p>"Mr. Rule, I cannot believe but that you will see
John to-morrow when the bank is opened, with
means to meet every demand."</p>

<p>"Yes, Miss Vernon, that is my conviction too."</p>

<p>But in what a faltering voice was this conviction
stated! The room was not very light, and they did
not distinguish very clearly each other's faces.</p>

<p>"But in case of any failure&mdash;" she said, "for of
course one never can tell, the most tiresome nothings
may detain you just when speed is most important;
or he might not have succeeded as he hoped. In
case of any&mdash;delay&mdash;I shall be there, Mr. Rule; you
may calculate upon me, with every penny I can
muster&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"You, Miss Vernon!" the clerk said, with a cry
of relief and joy.</p>

<p>"Certainly; who else, when the credit of the bank
is at stake? I have been living very quietly, you
know. I spend next to nothing; my mother's money
has accumulated till it is quite a little fortune, I
believe. What had I best do? send to Mr. Sellon
and ask him to help us on that security? I don't
think he will refuse."</p>

<p>"If you do that we are saved," said Rule, half
crying. "That is the thing to do. What a head
for business you have!"</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_28" id="Page_28">[Pg 28]</a></span></p>

<p>She smiled, and gave him a little nod, like one of
those happy nods she used to give to the young
clerks in her fine youthful days, in which there was
a kind acknowledgment of their admiration, a friendly
good fellowship with themselves.</p>

<p>"I hope I am not old Edward Vernon's grand-daughter
for nothing," she said, beginning to walk
up and down the room with a buoyant impatience,
as though longing for the moment of exertion to
come. "I had better write to Mr. Sellon at once;
there is no time to lose."</p>

<p>"And if you will let me I will take the note
directly, and bring you an answer."</p>

<p>"Bravo! that is promptitude," cried Miss Vernon;
and she went up to him and held out her hand.
"Between us we will keep the old place going," she
said, "whoever may give in."</p>

<p>If Mr. Rule had not been the steady, bashful
Englishman he was, he would have kissed that hand.
He felt that there was in it enough to save everything&mdash;the
bank first, and then his own little bit of
money, and his situation, and his children's bread.
He had not allowed himself to think of these things
in the greatness of his anxiety in respect to Vernon's;
but he did think of them now, and was ready to cry
in the relief of his soul.</p>

<p>Never was an evening more full of occupation.
Mr. Sellon, who was the agent of the Bank of England
in Redborough, was fortunately at home, and
responded at once to Miss Vernon's appeal. Mr.
Rule had the gratification of walking back with him<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_29" id="Page_29">[Pg 29]</a></span>
to the Grange, whither he hastened to reply in
person, and of assisting at the interview afterwards
with a sense of pride and personal advancement
which heightened the satisfaction of his soul. Miss
Vernon insisted strongly on the point that all
these preparations were by way of precaution
merely.</p>

<p>"My cousin will no doubt be back in time, fully
provided; but of course you never can be perfectly
certain. Horses may break down, shafts be broken;
the least little accident may spoil everything. Of
course John put off such a step till the last moment,
and thought it better to keep it entirely to himself."</p>

<p>"Of course," cried Rule, speaking out of his
corner; and "Of course," but much more faintly,
Mr. Sellon said.</p>

<p>"That is so evident that it requires no repetition:
but just as naturally Mr. Rule was alarmed, and had
the good sense to come to me."</p>

<p>All this was by way of convincing Mr. Sellon that
the whole matter was perfectly simple, and that
probably his resources would not be called upon at
all. To be sure, as in every case of a similar kind,
Miss Vernon might have saved herself the trouble,
the circumstances being far more clearly known to
Mr. Sellon than to herself. He was very sure that
John Vernon would not return, and that his intention
was to get himself out of it. Everybody had
known it was coming. It was just as well to humour
a lady, and accept her version as the right one; but
he was not for a moment deceived.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_30" id="Page_30">[Pg 30]</a></span></p>

<p>"Of course the bank," he said, "will make it up
to you afterwards."</p>

<p>"Of course," she said; "and if not, I don't know
who is to stop me from doing what I like with
my own."</p>

<p>He asked a few questions further, in which there
was a good deal of significance, as for instance something
about Mrs. John Vernon's marriage settlements,
which neither of the others for the moment understood.
Rule saw Mr. Sellon to the door, by Miss
Vernon's request, with great pride, and went back
to her afterwards, "as if he were one of the family,"
he described to his wife afterwards.</p>

<p>"Well," she said, "are you satisfied?"</p>

<p>"Oh, more than satisfied, happier than I can tell
you," cried the clerk. "The bank is saved!"</p>

<p>And then she, so triumphant, buoyant, inspired as
she was, sank down upon a chair, and put her head in
her hands, and he thought cried; but Rule was not a
man to spy upon a lady in the revulsion of her feelings.
When she looked up again she said to him quickly&mdash;</p>

<p>"In any case, Mr. Rule, we are both sure that
my cousin is doing all he can for the bank; if he
succeeds or not is in other hands."</p>

<p>"Oh yes, Miss Vernon, quite sure," Rule replied
promptly. He understood that she meant it to be
understood so, and determined within himself that
he was ready to go to the stake for the new dogma.
And then he related to her his interview with Mrs.
John, and her willingness to give him up her twenty
pounds to save the bank.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_31" id="Page_31">[Pg 31]</a></span></p>

<p>Miss Vernon's first flush of indignation soon yielded
to amusement and sympathy. She laughed and she
cried.</p>

<p>"That shall always be remembered to her credit,"
she said. "I did not think she had any feeling for
the bank. Let us always remember it to her credit.
She was ready to give all she had, and who can do
any more?"</p>

<p>Mr. Rule was somewhat intoxicated with all these
confidences, and with the way in which Miss Vernon
said "we"&mdash;his head was a little turned by it. She
was a woman who understood what it was to have
a faithful servant. No doubt, after the sacrifice she
was making, she would, in future, have more to do
with the business, and Rule could scarcely keep his
imagination from straying into a consideration of
changes that might be. Instead of merely being
head clerk, it was quite possible that a manager
might be required; but he pulled himself up, and
would not allow his thoughts to carry him so far.</p>

<p>Next day everything happened as had been foreseen.
There was a run on the bank, and a moment of great
excitement; but when Miss Vernon was seen at the
door of the inner office smiling, with her smile of
triumphant energy and capability, upon the crowd,
and when the Bank of England porters appeared
bringing in those heavy boxes, the run and all the
excitement subsided as by magic. The bank was
saved; but not by John Vernon. The outside world
never was aware how the matter was settled. But
John did not come back. He would have met<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_32" id="Page_32">[Pg 32]</a></span>
nothing but averted looks and biting words, for there
could be no doubt that he had abandoned his post,
and left Vernon's to its fate. Messrs. Pounce and
Seeling had a good deal to do about the matter, and
new deeds were drawn, and old deeds cancelled to a
serious extent; but the bank ever after remained in
the hands of Miss Vernon, who, it turned out, had
more than her grandfather's steady power of holding
on, and was, indeed, the heir of her great-grandfather's
genius for business. The bank throve in
her hands as it had done in his days, and everything
it touched prospered. She deserved it, to be sure,
but everybody who deserves does not get this fine
reward. There is something beyond, which we call
good luck or good fortune, or the favour of Heaven;
but as Heaven does not favour all, or even most of
the best people in this way, we have to fall back
upon a less pious phraseology. Is it, perhaps, genius
for business, as distinct as genius in poetry, which
makes everything succeed? But this is more than any
man can be expected to understand. Rule attained
all the heights of those hopes which had vaguely
dawned on him out of the mist on that July evening
when his good angel suggested to him Catherine
Vernon's name. He was raised to the dignity of
manager as he had foreseen. His salary was doubled,
his sons were provided for, and he grew old in such
comfort and general esteem as he had never dreamed
of. "This is the man that saved the bank," Miss
Vernon would say. And though, of course, he deprecated
such high praise, and declared that he<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_33" id="Page_33">[Pg 33]</a></span>
was nothing but the humblest instrument, yet there
can be no doubt that he came to believe it in the
end, as his wife and all his children did from the
beginning.</p>

<p>Miss Vernon's was a reign of great benevolence,
of great liberality, but of great firmness too. As
she got older she became almost the most important
person in Redborough. The people spoke of her,
as they sometimes do of a very popular man, by
her Christian name. Catherine Vernon did this
and that, they said. Catherine Vernon was the first
thought when anything was wanted either by the
poor who needed help, or the philanthropist who
wanted to give it. The Vernon Almshouses, which
had been established a hundred years before, but
had fallen into great decay till she took them in
hand, were always known as Catherine Vernon's
Almshouses. Her name was put to everything.
Catherine Street, Catherine Square, Catherine places
without number. The people who built little houses
on the outskirts exhausted their invention in varying
the uses of it. Catherine Villas, Catherine Cottage,
Catherine Mansion, were on all sides; and when it
occurred to the High Church rector to dedicate the
new church to St. Catherine of Alexandria, the common
people, with one accord, transferred the invocation
to their living patroness. She was, at least, a
saint more easily within reach, and more certain to
lend a favourable ear.</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_34" id="Page_34">[Pg 34]</a></span></p>




<h2><a name="CHAPTER_III" id="CHAPTER_III">CHAPTER III.</a></h2>

<h3>THE VERNONRY.</h3>


<p>These things all happened a great number of
years before the beginning of this history. Catherine
Vernon had become an old woman&mdash;at least she was
sixty-five; you can call that an old woman if you
please. Sometimes it may mean the extreme of
age, decrepitude and exhaustion: but sometimes
also it means a softer and more composed middle
age&mdash;a lovely autumnal season in which all the
faculties retain their force without any of their
harshness, and toleration and Christian charity replace
all sharpness of criticism or sternness of
opinion. Sometimes this beautiful age will fall to
the lot of those who have experienced a large share
of the miseries of life and learnt its bitterest
lessons, but often&mdash;and this seems most natural&mdash;it
is the peaceful souls who have suffered little to whom
this crown of continuance is given. Catherine
Vernon belonged to the last class. If her youth
had not been altogether happy, there had been fewer<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_35" id="Page_35">[Pg 35]</a></span>
sorrows and still fewer struggles in her life. She
had gone along peacefully, her own mistress, nobody
making her afraid, no one to be anxious about, no
one dear enough to rend her heart. Most people
who have gone through the natural experiences of
life are of opinion with the Laureate, that it is</p>

<div class="poetry-container">
 <div class="poetry">
  <div class="stanza">
<div class="verse">"Better to have loved and lost<br /></div>
<div class="verse">Than never to have loved at all."<br /></div>
  </div>
 </div>
</div>

<p>But then we do not allow the other people to
speak who know the other side of the question. If
love brings great happiness it brings many woes.
Catherine Vernon was like Queen Elizabeth, a dry
tree&mdash;while other women had sons and daughters.
But when the hearts of the mothers were torn with
anxiety, she went free. She had the good of other
people's children in a wonderful degree, but it was
impossible she could have the harm of them&mdash;for
those whom she took to were the good children, as
was natural, the elect of this world. Her life had
been full of exertion and occupation since that night
when Rule called upon her at the Grange and set
all the world of her being in movement. What
flagging and loneliness might have been hers&mdash;what
weariness and longing had ended at that time.
Since then how much she had found to do! The
work of a successful man of business increased, yet
softened by all the countless nothings that make
business for a woman, had filled her days. She was
an old maid, to be sure, but an old maid who never
was alone. Her house had been gay with young<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_36" id="Page_36">[Pg 36]</a></span>
friends and tender friendship. She had been the
first love of more girls than she could count. By
the time she was sixty-five she was a sort of amateur
grandmother in numbers of young households. A
woman with plenty of money, with a handsome,
cheerful house, and a happy disposition, she had&mdash;at
least since her youth was over&mdash;never had occasion
to remember the want of those absorbing
affections which bind a married woman within her
own circle. The children of the barren in her case
were more than those of any wife. If ever in her
heart she said to herself, like Matthew in the
poem&mdash;</p>

<div class="poetry-container">
 <div class="poetry">
  <div class="stanza">
<div class="verse">"Many love me, yet by none<br /></div>
<div class="verse">Am I enough beloved,"<br /></div>
  </div>
 </div>
</div>

<p>the sentiment never showed, and must have
occurred only as Matthew's did, in moods as evanescent
as the clouds. Her face was not without lines,
for that would be to say that it was without expression;
nor did she look too young for her age:
but her eye was not dim, nor her natural force
abated. She had a finer colour than in her girlhood,
though the red was not so smooth, but a little broken
in her soft cheek. Her hair was white and beautiful,
her figure ample, but graceful still. At sixty she
had given up work, entering upon, she said, the
Sabbatical period of her life. For the rest of her
days she meant to keep Sunday, resting from her
labours&mdash;and indeed, with perhaps too close a
following of the divine example for any human
creature to venture upon, finding them very good.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_37" id="Page_37">[Pg 37]</a></span></p>

<p>It follows as a matter of course that she had
found somebody to replace her in the bank. There
were so many Vernons, that this was not very
difficult to do. At least it was not difficult to find
candidates for so important a post. Descendants
of the brothers and sisters of the great John
Vernon, who had first made the bank what it was,
were plentiful, and from among them Catherine
Vernon selected two hopeful young men to carry on
her work. One of them, Harry Vernon, was descended
from the daughter of the great John, who
had married a relation and continued to bear the
family name. The other went further back and
traced his descent from a brother of that great John.
The parents of these fortunate young men acquiesced
with delight in the proposals she made to them. It
was a certain fortune&mdash;an established living at once&mdash;far
better than the chances of the Bar, or the
Indian Civil Examinations, or Colorado, which had
begun to be the alternative for young men. Indeed
it was only Edward Vernon who had parents to be
consulted. Harry had but a sister, who had come
to live with him in the fine house which the last
John, the one who had put the bank in such deadly
peril, had built. Edward lived with Miss Vernon
herself. Five years had passed since their inauguration
as partners and managers, with very little
change in their feelings towards the old cousin, who
had done so much for them, and whom they called
Aunt Catherine. She was Aunt Catherine to a
great many people, but these three, who were the<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_38" id="Page_38">[Pg 38]</a></span>
nearest to her in blood, were disposed to give themselves
airs, and to punish intruders who presumed
upon a fictitious relationship. They were to all
appearance quite satisfactory young people, if perhaps
not brilliant; and pious persons said that Miss
Vernon had got her reward for her kindness to the
poor, and her more than kindness to her poor relations.
She was surrounded by those who were to
her like children of her own. No mother could
have had sons more respectful and devoted. Good
and virtuous and kind children&mdash;what could a
woman have more?</p>

<p>Perhaps this was rather a flattering and ideal
statement of the case; but at all events one of the
young men satisfied all Miss Vernon's requirements,
and they were both steady-going, fine young fellows,
paying every attention to business, keeping everything
going. Ellen perhaps was not quite so satisfactory.
She was young and headstrong, and not
sure that Catherine Vernon was all that people
made her out to be. There was nothing wonderful
in this. To hear one person for ever applauded is
more likely than anything else to set an impatient
mind against that person&mdash;and Ellen kept her old
cousin at arm's length, and showed her little affection.
Nobody could doubt that this must have
vexed Miss Vernon, but she took it with wonderful
calm.</p>

<p>"Your sister does not like me," she said to Harry;
"never mind, she is young, and she will know better
one day."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_39" id="Page_39">[Pg 39]</a></span></p>

<p>"You must not think so," Harry said. "Ellen
is foolish and headstrong, but she has a very good
heart."</p>

<p>Catherine Vernon nodded a little and shook her
head.</p>

<p>"It is not a heart," she said, "that is disposed
towards me. But never mind; she will think better
of it one day."</p>

<p>Thus you will see that Miss Vernon escaped from
the worst, and had the best, of motherhood. What
a bitterness to her heart would this alienation have
been, had Ellen been her child! but as the troublesome
girl was not her child in reality, the unkindness
vexed her in a very much less degree. She was able
to think of the boys, who were so good, without
being disturbed by the image of the girl, who was
not so good. And so all things went on serenely,
and the years went by, gentle, unremarkable,
tranquil years.</p>

<p>Several years before this, before indeed the young
people had entered into her life, the old house, called
the Heronry, came into Miss Vernon's hands. It was
at some distance on the same side of the Common,
but a little further out towards the country than the
Grange&mdash;a large old red-brick house, in the midst of
a thin but lofty group of trees. Though it was so
near the town, there was something forlorn in it,
standing out against the west, the tall trees dark
against the light, the irregular outline of the old
house flush against the sky, for it was a flat country,
no hills or undulations, but everything that was tall<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_40" id="Page_40">[Pg 40]</a></span>
enough showing direct against the horizon in a way
that was sometimes very impressive. This great old
house Miss Vernon made a curious use of. It contained
a multitude of rooms, not any very large
except that which occupied the centre of the area,
a sort of hall, with a great staircase going out of it.
From the moment it came into her hands, she made,
everybody thought, a toy of the Heronry. She
divided it into about half a dozen compartments,
each with a separate entrance. It was very cleverly
done, so as not to interfere in any way with the
appearance of the place. The doors were not new
and unsightly, but adapted with great care, some of
them being windows a little enlarged. What was it
for? All kinds of rumours ran about the town. It
was some sort of a convent which she was going to
institute, a community of an apostolical kind, a
sisterhood, a hospital, a set of almshouses. Some
went so far as to call it Catherine Vernon's Folly.
She spent a great deal of money upon it, elaborating
her whim, whatever it might be. It was fitted up
with apparatus for warming, which would make the
dwellers in it independent of fires, people said, and
this looked like a hospital everybody allowed. There
was no end to the conveniences, the comforts of the
place. The old-fashioned gardens were put in order,
and the greatest trouble taken to make the old pool&mdash;which
had got the place its name, and where it
was said that herons had actually been seen in the
lifetime of some old inhabitants&mdash;wholesome and
without prejudice to the health of the house. The<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_41" id="Page_41">[Pg 41]</a></span>
pool itself was very weird, and strange to be so near
the dwelling of ordinary life. It lay in the centre of
the clump of trees which had once been a wood, and
which round it had grown tall and bare, with clumps
of foliage on the top, and straight, long stems
mounting to the sky, and shining in long lines of
reflection in the still, dark water. Several gaunt
and ghostly old firs were among them, which in the
sunset were full of colour, but in twilight stood up
black and wild against the clear, pale sky. This
pool was about as far from the Grange as Miss
Vernon could walk with comfort, and it was a walk
she was very fond of taking on summer nights. The
Common lay between the house and the town;
beyond it spread the long levels of the flat country.
In the summer all was golden about, with gorse and
patches of purple heather, and the abundant growth
of wild, uncultivated nature. What did Catherine
Vernon mean to do with this house? That was
what all Redborough wanted to know.</p>

<p>By the time at which this story properly begins,
Redborough had been acquainted for years with Miss
Vernon's intentions; they were indeed no longer intentions,
but had been carried out. The Heronry
had changed its name, if not formally, yet in familiar
parlance, throughout all the neighbourhood, and was
called the Vernonry even by people who did not
know why. The six dwellings which had been contrived
so cleverly were all occupied by relations and
dependents of the family, members of the house of
Vernon, or connections of the same. They made a<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_42" id="Page_42">[Pg 42]</a></span>
little community among themselves, but not the
community of a sisterhood or a hospital. It was
said that they had their little internal feuds and
squabbles, as people living so close together are
always supposed to have, but they were sufficiently
well bred, or sufficiently in awe of their cousin and
patroness, to keep these quarrels decorously to themselves.
How far they were indebted to her for their
living, as well as their lodging, nobody knew, which
was not for want of many a strenuous investigation
on the part of the neighbourhood; but the inmates
of the Vernonry were clever enough to keep their
own counsel on a matter which involved their own
consequence and credit. Disagreeable things were
indeed said about "genteel almshouses," and "poor
relations," when it first became a question in
Redborough about calling on the new residents.
But, as it turned out, they were all persons of pretensions,
expecting to be called upon by the county,
and contemptuous of the townspeople. Five of the
six apartments into which the old house had been
divided were occupied, when Redborough was startled
by the extraordinary intelligence that the last and
best had been reserved for no less interesting an
inmate than Mrs. John Vernon, she who had left the
town in circumstances so painful. John Vernon, the
unfortunate or the culpable, who had all but ruined
the bank, and left it to its ruin, had died abroad.
His wife's marriage settlement had secured their
income, but he had spent as much as it was possible
to spend of that, and forestalled every penny that he<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_43" id="Page_43">[Pg 43]</a></span>
could manage to forestall. His debts were such that
his widow's income was sadly crippled by the necessity
of paying them, which it was said she would not
herself have seen so clearly but for the determined
way in which it was taken up by her child, a very
young girl, born long after the catastrophe, but one
who was apparently of the old stock, with a head for
business, and a decision of character quite unusual in
a child. Mrs. John's return caused a great sensation
in Redborough. She was very well connected, and
there could be no question on anybody's mind as to
the propriety of calling on a woman who was aunt
to Sir John Southwood, and first cousin to Lady
Hartingale. How she could like to come back there,
to live within sight of her own beautiful house, and
to be indebted for shelter to Catherine Vernon, was
a much more difficult matter to understand. But
as everybody said, that of course was Mrs. John's
own concern. If she could make up her mind to it,
certainly nobody else had any call to interfere.</p>

<p>But what a change it was from the fatal day when
poor Mr. Rule, all anxious and miserable, was shown
in by the curious servant to the costly drawing-room
in which John Vernon's wife, in her spotted muslin,
sat ignorant of business, but confident and satisfied
in her good fortune and in the certainty that all
would go well with her! Poor lady! she had learned
some few things since that day, but never had
grasped the mystery of her downfall, nor known
how it was that everything had collapsed in a moment,
tumbling down like a house of cards. She<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_44" id="Page_44">[Pg 44]</a></span>
had not, indeed, tried to understand at that terrible
time when it all burst upon her&mdash;when the fact that
she had to leave her house, and that her furniture
was going to be sold in spite of all her indignant
protestations, compelled her understanding, such as
it was, into the knowledge that her husband was
ruined. She had too much to do then, in crying,
in packing, in appealing to heaven and earth to
know what she had done to be so cruelly used, and
in trying to make out how she was to travel, to be
able to face the problem how it had all come about.
And after she went away the strangeness and novelty
of everything swept thought out of her mind, if,
indeed, it ever entered there at all. Perhaps it was
only after that life was over, and when widowed and
growing old she came back to the strange little house
which Catherine Vernon had written to offer her,
that she remembered once more to ask herself the
question. Or, perhaps, even then it was not she who
asked it, but Hester, who, greatly excited, with eyes
large with curiosity and interest, clinging to her
mother's arm in a way she had, which looked like
dependence, and was control, went all over the new-old
place with her, drinking in information. Hester
led her mother wherever she pleased, holding her
arm embraced in her own two clasped hands. It
was her way of holding the helm. She was a tall
girl of fourteen when she came to the Heronry, outgrowing
all her frocks, and all her previous knowledge,
and thirsting to understand everything. She
had never been in England before, though she prided<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_45" id="Page_45">[Pg 45]</a></span>
herself on being an English girl. She knew scarcely
anything about her family, why it was they lived
abroad, what was their history, or by what means
they were so severed from all relationships and
friendships. The letter of Catherine Vernon offering
them a house to live in had roused her, with all
the double charm of novelty and mysterious, unknown
relationship. "Who is she? Cousin Catherine?
Papa's cousin! Why is she so kind? Oh
yes, of course she must be kind&mdash;very kind, or she
would not offer us a house. And that is where you
used to live? Redborough. I should think in a
week&mdash;say a week&mdash;we might be ready to go." It
was thus that she carried her mother along, who at
the first did not at all intend to go. Hester arrived
at the curious old house, which was unlike anything
she had ever seen before, with eyes like two notes of
interrogation, brilliant, flaming, inquiring into everything;
and as soon as her mother had rested, and
had taken that cup of tea which is an Englishwoman's
comfort, the girl had her out to see what was to be
seen, and led her about, turning the helm now one
way, now another. The Grange was visible as soon
as they got beyond their gate, and on the other side
of the red roofs of Wilton Street, standing on the
only height that exists in the neighbourhood, there
was the white and splendid "elevation" of the White
House, still splendid, though a little the worse for
wear. Mrs. John stood still, resisting the action of
the helm unconsciously, and all at once began to cry.
"That is where we used to live," she said, with little<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_46" id="Page_46">[Pg 46]</a></span>
sobs breaking in, "that&mdash;that is where we lived when
we married. It was built for me; and now to think
I have nothing to do with it&mdash;nothing!"</p>

<p>It was then that the question arose, large, embracing
the entire past, and so many things that were
beyond the mother's knowledge&mdash;"Why did papa go
away?" Mrs. John cried, she could not help it,
feeling in a moment all the difference, the wonderful
change, the downfall and reversal of everything
that in those days she had expected and hoped. She
dried her eyes half a dozen times, and then burst out
again. "Oh, what have I done that so much should
happen to me! and Catherine Vernon always the
same," she said. After a while Hester ceased to ask
any questions, ceased to impel her mother this way
or that by her arm, but led her home quietly to the
strange house, with its dark wainscot, which was so
unfamiliar, and made her lie down upon the sofa.
Mrs. John was not a person of original impulses.
What she did to-day she had done a great many
times before. Her daughter knew all her little
ways by heart. She knew about how long she
would cry, and when she would cheer up again;
and in the meantime she did her best to put two
and two together and make out for herself the outline
of the history. Of course she was all wrong.
She had heard that her father was the victim of a
conspiracy, and she had never seen him on any but
his best side. Her idea was he had been wronged;
perhaps he was too clever, perhaps too good, for the
designing people round him, and they had laid their<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_47" id="Page_47">[Pg 47]</a></span>
heads together and procured his ruin. The only
thing that puzzled Hester was the share that the
unknown Cousin Catherine had in it. Had she been
against him too? But, if so, why was she kind to
his wife and child? Perhaps out of remorse and
compunction? Perhaps because she was an old
woman, and wanted to make up a little for what she
had done? But this was all vague, and Hester was
prudent enough not to make up her mind about it
until further inquiries. She put her mother to bed
in the meantime, and did all the little things for her
which were part of Mrs. John's system. She brushed
her hair, still so pretty; she tied nicely, as if it were
an article of full dress, the strings of her nightcap;
she put all her little things by her on the table by
her bedside&mdash;her Bible and prayer-book, the novel
she had been reading on the journey, a biscuit in case
she should wake up feeling faint in the night. There
was quite an array of small matters. And then
Hester kissed her mother and bid her go to sleep.
"You will not be long of coming to bed, dear?" Mrs.
John said; and the girl promised. But she went
away, carrying her candle into one wainscoted room
after another, asking herself if she liked them. She
had been used to big white rooms in France. She
saw gleams of her own face, and reflections of her
light in the deep brown of these walls with a
pleasant little thrill of alarm. It was all very
strange, she had never seen anything like it before;
but what was the reason why papa left? What had
he done? What had been done to him? One of<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_48" id="Page_48">[Pg 48]</a></span>
the down stairs rooms opened upon a pretty verandah,
into which she was just about stepping, notwithstanding
her dread that the wind would blow her
candle out, when suddenly she was met by a large
and stately figure which made the heart jump in
Hester's breast. Miss Catherine had come out, as
she did so often at night, with a white shawl thrown
over her cap. The road was so quiet&mdash;and if it had
been ever so noisy Catherine Vernon could surely
dress as she pleased, and go as she pleased, from one
place to another in Redborough and its neighbourhood.
She saw coming out upon her in the light of a candle
a pair of brown eyes, large and wide open, full of
eager curiosity, with a tall girl behind them, somewhat
high-shouldered, with clustering curly short
hair. Catherine Vernon was not without prejudices,
and she did not like Mrs. John, nor did she expect
(or perhaps intend) to like her daughter. There was
something in the girl's face which disarmed her suspicion;
but she was not a person to give in, and give
up her foregone conclusion on any such trifling
occasion as that.</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_49" id="Page_49">[Pg 49]</a></span></p>




<h2><a name="CHAPTER_IV" id="CHAPTER_IV">CHAPTER IV.</a></h2>

<h3>A FIRST MEETING.</h3>


<p>Catherine Vernon had come to see with her own
eyes that her guests or tenants had arrived, and that
they were comfortable. They were relations, which
justified the want of ceremony; but, perhaps, if
they had not been poor, and she had not been their
benefactor, she would scarcely, in so very easy a way,
with a shawl over her cap, and at an hour not
adapted for visits, have made the first call upon
them. She would have been more indignant than
any one at such a suggestion; but human motives
are very subtle, and, no doubt, though she was not
in the least aware of it, this was true. To be sure,
there were circumstances in which such a visit would
have seemed, of all things, the most kind, but not,
perhaps, with persons so little in sympathy as
Catherine Vernon and Mrs. John. She knew she
had been substantially kind. It is so much easier
to be substantially kind than to show that tender
regard for other people's feelings which is the only
thing which ever calls forth true gratitude; and<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_50" id="Page_50">[Pg 50]</a></span>
perhaps Catherine had not altogether escaped the
deteriorating influences of too much prosperity. In
her solitude she had become a great observer of men&mdash;and
women: and was disposed to find much
amusement in this observation. Miss Vernon was
half aware that other motives than those of pure
benevolence affected her mind as she went that
evening to the Vernonry. Curiosity was in it. She
could not but wonder how Mrs. John was feeling,
what she thought of all these changes. She was
glad that her cousin's widow had come home where
she could be looked after, and where it would be
seen that nothing happened to her; but she had
wondered above measure when her offer of shelter
and a home had been accepted, not knowing, of
course, anything about that very active factor in
Mrs. John's affairs, who was known to the people in
Redborough only as "the little girl." Catherine
Vernon thought that she herself, in Mrs. John's
position, would have starved or worked her fingers
to the bone rather than have come back in such a
humiliated condition to the neighbourhood where
she had held so different a place. She was rather
glad to feel herself justified in her contempt of her
cousin's wife by this failure in her of all "proper
pride"; and she allowed curiosity and a sense of
superiority and her low estimate of Mrs. John's
capacity of feeling, to carry the day over her natural
sense of courtesy. What so natural, she said to
herself, as that she should run out and see whether
they had arrived, and if they were comfortable, and<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_51" id="Page_51">[Pg 51]</a></span>
establish friendly, easy relations at once, without
waiting for formalities? <i>Qui s'excuse s'accuse.</i> Miss
Vernon certainly knew, at the bottom of her heart,
that sorrow and downfall merited a more respectful
accost; but then Mrs. John had none of those
delicacies of feeling, or it was not in nature that she
would have come at all. And nothing could be more
substantially kind than Catherine knew she had
been. She had engaged an excellent servant for
them&mdash;a woman who had been in her own house,
and who was a capital cook, and capable of taking
a kind of charge as housekeeper if Mrs. John still
remained incapable as of old; and, no doubt, Miss
Vernon thought, there would be a foreign <i>bonne</i> of
some sort or other to take care of "the little girl."
Her own maid accompanied her to the gate, then went
round to the humbler entrance while Miss Vernon
walked through the garden to the pretty verandah
newly put up (but in excellent taste and keeping,
everybody said), which was intended to form a sort
of conservatory in a sunny corner, and give the
inhabitants a little more elegance and modern
prettiness than the other houses afforded. She
had done this on purpose for Mrs. John, who had
got used, no doubt, to foreign ways, sitting out of
doors, and indulgences of that kind. Could anything
have been more kind? And yet, at the bottom of
her heart, Miss Vernon was aware that if she had
resisted her impulse to come and spy upon the poor
traveller this first night, and investigate her feelings,
and how she was supporting the change, and all the<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_52" id="Page_52">[Pg 52]</a></span>
recollections to be called forth by her return, she
would have been far more really kind. She felt
this, yet she came. What is there in the human
bosom more strong than the desire to see how the
gladiators die? Poor Mrs. John was no gladiator,
but she was upon the point of that sword of suffering
which some writhe and struggle upon, and some
allow themselves to be wounded by, in silence. Miss
Vernon was very anxious to know how she was
bearing it. The daylight, which had come to an
end altogether in the dark wainscoted rooms inside,
was still lingering without. Behind the trees there
was a golden clearness upon the horizon, against
which every branch stood out. The stars were only
half visible in the faint blue. The walk had been
delightful. It was the time she preferred to be
abroad, her mind undisturbed by those cares which
pursue less peaceful people, yielding itself up entirely
to the spell of universal tranquillity and repose.</p>

<p>But when Miss Vernon, opening the glass door
of the verandah, suddenly came in sight of a figure
which was quite unexpected, which she could not
identify or recognise, she was, for the moment, too
much startled to speak. A tall girl of fourteen, in
that large development which so many girls attain
at that early age, to be "fined down" into slim
grace and delicacy afterwards&mdash;with rather high
shoulders, increased by the simple form of her dress;
hair of a chestnut colour, cut short, and clustering
in natural rings and twists&mdash;not curled in the
ordinary sense of the word; a complexion in which<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_53" id="Page_53">[Pg 53]</a></span>
white predominated, the creamy whiteness of a
sanguine temperament, with but little of the rose;
and two large, eager brown eyes, full of curiosity,
full of life, evidently interrogating everything,
coming out, even upon the twilight and the tears
of departing day, with her lighted candle and all-questioning
eyes. There was so much warmth of
life and movement about Hester, that it was difficult
not to feel a certain interest in her; and there was
something wonderfully characteristic in her attitude,
arrested, as she stepped out, like an explorer, with
her candle in her hand.</p>

<p>"I don't know you," said Catherine Vernon, who,
from her general popularity and the worship administered
to her all round, had, perhaps without
knowing it, acquired the familiar ease of expression
which belonged to kind and well-intentioned despots.
The tone of her voice, Hester thought, who was
accustomed to that distinction, was as if she said
"<i>tu</i>." And it depends a great deal upon circumstances
whether it is affection or insult to <i>tutoyer</i> a
stranger. "I don't know you," she said, coming in
without any invitation, and closing the glass door
behind her. "I suppose you must have come with
Mrs. John Vernon. It is not possible," she cried a
moment after, "that you are the little girl?"</p>

<p>"I am all the girl there is. I am Hester: but I
don't know you either," the girl said, determined
not to show any poltroonery or to veil her pretensions
for any one. "Are you Cousin Catherine?" she
added after a moment, with a quick drawn breath.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_54" id="Page_54">[Pg 54]</a></span></p>

<p>"Yes, I am Cousin Catherine. I came to see how
you have got through your journey, and how your
mother is. I suppose she is your mother? It is
quite astonishing to me to see you look almost like a
grown up young woman, you whom I have always
thought of as the little girl."</p>

<p>"I am fourteen," said Hester. "I never was
very little since I can remember;" and then they
stood and looked at each other under the glass
roof, which still let in some light among the flowers,
their two faces lit up by the flame of the candle.
Hester stood in front of the door which led into
the house, and, indeed, had something the aspect
of a guardian of the house preventing the visitor
from going in. There was a sort of resemblance
to each other in their faces and somewhat
largely developed figures; but this, which
ought to have been a comfortable and soothing
thought, did not occur to either. And it cannot
be denied that the first encounter was hostile on
both sides.</p>

<p>"I should like to see your mother: to&mdash;welcome
her&mdash;home."</p>

<p>"She has gone to bed. She was&mdash;tired," Hester
said; and then, with an effort&mdash;"I do not suppose it
is quite happy for her, just the first night, coming
back to the place she used to live in. I made her
go to bed."</p>

<p>"You take good care of her," said Miss Vernon;
"that is right. She always wanted taking care of."
Then, with a smile, she added, "Am I not to go in?<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_55" id="Page_55">[Pg 55]</a></span>
I came to see if you were comfortable and had
everything you want."</p>

<p>"Mother will be much obliged," said Hester,
stiffly. She did not know any better. She was not
accustomed to visitors, and was altogether at a loss
what to do&mdash;not to speak of the instinct of opposition
which sprang up in her mind to this first new
actor in the new life which lay vaguely existing and
unknown before her feet. It seemed to her, she
could scarcely tell how, that here was an enemy,
some one to be held at arm's length. As for
Catherine Vernon, she was more completely taken
aback by this encounter than by anything which had
happened for years. Few people opposed her or met
her with suspicion, much less hostility; and the
aspect of this girl standing in the doorway, defending
it, as it were, preventing her from entering, was
half comic, half exasperating. Keeping her out of
her own house! It was one of the drawbacks of
her easy beneficence, the <i>defauts de ses qualit&eacute;s</i>, that
she felt a little too distinctly that it was her own
house, which, seeing she had given it to Mrs. John,
was an ungenerosity in the midst of her generosity.
But she was human, like the rest of us. She began
to laugh, bewildered, half angry, yet highly tickled
with the position, while Hester stood in front of her,
regarding her curiously with those big eyes. "I
must rest here, if I am not to go in," she said.
"I hope you don't object to that; for it is as much
as I can do to walk from the Grange here."</p>

<p>Hester felt as if her lips were sealed. She could<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_56" id="Page_56">[Pg 56]</a></span>
not say anything; indeed she did not know what she
ought to say. A vague sense that she was behaving
badly made her uncomfortable; but she was not
going to submit, to yield to the first comer, to let
anybody enter who chose. Was she not the guardian
of her mother, and of her quiet and repose? She
shifted her position a little as Miss Vernon sat down
on one of the creaking basket chairs, but did not
even put her candle out of her hand, or relax in her
defensive attitude. When her visitor laughed again,
Hester felt a flush of hot anger, like a flame, going
over her. To be ludicrous is the last thing a girl
can bear: but even for that she would not give in.</p>

<p>"You are a capital guardian," Catherine said,
"but I assure you I am not an enemy. I shall have
to call my maid Jennings, who has gone to the
kitchen to see Betsey, before I go home, for I am not
fond of walking alone. You must try and learn that
we are all friends here. I suppose your mother
has told you a great deal about the Vernons&mdash;and
me?"</p>

<p>"I don't know about any Vernons&mdash;except ourselves,"
Hester said.</p>

<p>"My dear," said Miss Vernon, hastily, "you must
not get it into your little head that you are by any
means at the head of the house, or near it. Your
grandfather was only the second son, and you are
only a girl&mdash;if you had been a boy it might have
been different; and even my great-grandfather, John
Vernon, who is the head of our branch, was nothing
more than a cadet of the principal family. So don't<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_57" id="Page_57">[Pg 57]</a></span>
give yourself any airs on that score. All your
neighbours here are better Vernons than you&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"I never give myself any airs&mdash;I don't know what
you mean," said Hester, feeling a wish to cry, but
mastering herself with all the strength of passion.</p>

<p>"Don't you, my poor child? I think you do.
You are behaving in a silly way, you know, meeting
me like this. Your mother should have taught you
better manners. I have no desire but to be kind to
you. But never mind, I will not say anything about
it, for I dare say you are all put the wrong way with
fatigue and excitement; otherwise I should think
you were excessively uncivil, do you know," Miss
Vernon said.</p>

<p>And Hester stood, fiery-red, and listened. If she
had spoken she must have cried&mdash;there was no
alternative. The candle flickered between the two
antagonists. They were antagonists already, as
much as if they had been on terms of equality.
When Miss Vernon had rested as long as she
thought necessary, she got up and bade her young
enemy good-night. "Tell your mother that I have
done my duty in the way of calling, and that it is
she now who must come to me," she said.</p>

<p>Hester stood at the door of the verandah, with her
candle flaring into the night, while Catherine went
round to the other door to call Jennings, her maid,
and then watched the two walking away together
with a mixture of confused feeling which filled her
childish soul to overflowing. She wanted to cry, to
stamp with her feet, and clench her fists, and grind<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_58" id="Page_58">[Pg 58]</a></span>
her teeth. She was like a child in the unreasoning
force of her passion, which was bitter shame as well.
She had behaved like a savage, like a fool, she knew,
like a little silly, ill-tempered child. She ought to
be whipped for her rudeness, and&mdash;oh, far worse!&mdash;she
would be laughed at. Does not every one
remember the overwhelming, intolerable shame and
mortification which envelope a young creature like a
sudden flame when she perceives that her conduct
has been ludicrous as well as wrong, and that she has
laid herself open to derision and laughter? Oh, if
she could but wipe that hour out of her life! But
Hester felt that never, never could it be wiped out
of her life. She would remember it if she lived to
be a hundred, Miss Vernon would remember it, and
tell everybody what a senseless, rude, ignorant being
she was. Oh, if the earth would open and swallow
her up! She did not wish to live any longer with
the consciousness of this mistake. The first time,
the first time she had been tried&mdash;and she had made
herself ridiculous! The tears came pouring from
her eyes like hail-drops, hot and stinging. Oh, how
she stamped upon the floor! Never more could she
hold up her head in this new place. She had covered
herself with shame the very first hour. All the
self-restraint she could exercise was to keep herself
from flying up stairs and waking her mother in order
to tell her all that had happened. She was not what
people call unselfish&mdash;the one quality which is supposed
to be appropriate to feminine natures. She
was kind and warm-hearted and affectionate, but she<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_59" id="Page_59">[Pg 59]</a></span>
was not without thought of herself. Her own little
affairs naturally bulked more largely to her than
everything else in the world. She could scarcely
endure to keep all this to herself till to-morrow.
She had indeed flown up stairs with a cry of
"Mother, mother!" open-mouthed: and then it had
occurred to her that to wake her mother would be
cruel. She was very tired, and she had been more
"upset" than Hester had ever seen her. Probably
she would be still upset in the morning if she were
disturbed now in her slumber. Hester's fortitude
was not sufficient to make her go to bed quietly.
She was almost noisy in her undressing, letting her
hair-brush fall, and pushing the furniture about,
hoping every moment that her mother would wake.
But Mrs. John was very tired, and she was a good
sleeper. She lay perfectly still notwithstanding this
commotion; and Hester, with her heart swelling,
had to put herself to bed at last, where she soon fell
asleep too, worn out with passion and pain&mdash;things
which weary the spirit more than even a day on the
railway or crossing the Channel when there are
storms at sea.</p>

<p>Miss Vernon went home half amused, but more
than half angry. Edward Vernon had not very long
before taken up his abode at the Grange, and he was
very attentive to Aunt Catherine, as many of the
family called her. He came out to meet her when
she appeared, and blamed her tenderly for not calling
him when she went out.</p>

<p>"I do not think you would have been the worse<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_60" id="Page_60">[Pg 60]</a></span>
for my arm," he said. He was a slim young man
with a black beard, though he was still quite young,
and a gentle expression in his eyes. He was one of
those of whom it is said he never gave his parents
an anxious hour; but there was something in his
face which made one wonder whether this was from
genuine goodness, or because he had never yet come
under temptation. This doubt had passed through
Catherine Vernon's mind when she heard all that
his enthusiastic family had to say of him; but it had
worn away in beholding the sweetness of his disposition,
and his gentle, regular life. To see him so
dutiful and gentle was a relief and comfort to her
after the encounter she had just had.</p>

<p>"It would have given you a sensation," she said,
"I promise you, if you had come with me, Edward.
I have just had a meeting with a little spitfire, a
little tiger-cat."</p>

<p>"Who is that, Aunt Catherine?"</p>

<p>Miss Vernon threw her shawl off her cap, and sat
down on the sofa to take breath. She had walked
home faster than usual in the excitement of the
moment.</p>

<p>"If you will believe me," she said, "I don't even
know her name&mdash;except of course that it is Vernon,
John Vernon's daughter. I suppose she must have
been warned against me, and instructed to keep me
at arm's length."</p>

<p>"To keep <i>you</i> at arm's length? That is not
possible."</p>

<p>"Well, it does not look likely, does it?" she said,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_61" id="Page_61">[Pg 61]</a></span>
somewhat mollified. "People are not generally
afraid of Catherine Vernon: but it is singular sometimes
how you will find your own family steeled
against you, when everybody else likes you well
enough. They see you too near at hand, where
there is no illusion possible, I suppose; but that
could not be the case with this little thing, who
never set eyes on me before. She let me know that
her mother was not to be disturbed, and even refused
me admission&mdash;what do you think?&mdash;to my
own house."</p>

<p>"Are you quite sure there is no mistake?" said
Edward; "it seems incomprehensible to me."</p>

<p>"Oh, I do not find it incomprehensible. She is
Mrs. John's daughter, and there never was any love
lost between us. I always felt her to be a vacant,
foolish creature; and no one can tell what a venturesome,
ridiculous hoyden she thought me."</p>

<p>Here Catherine Vernon felt herself grow hot all
over, as Hester had done, bethinking herself of an
encounter not altogether unlike the present, in which
she had enacted Hester's part, and exposed herself
to the ridicule of Mrs. John. Though this was
nearly half a century ago, it had still power to move
her with that overwhelming sense of mortification.
There are things which no one ever forgets.</p>

<p>"When I heard of that woman coming home, I
knew mischief would come of it," Miss Vernon said.</p>

<p>"But forgive me, Aunt Catherine, was it not you
that asked her to come?"</p>

<p>Catherine Vernon laughed.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_62" id="Page_62">[Pg 62]</a></span></p>

<p>"You have me there," she said. "I see you are
quick, and I see you are honest, Edward. Most
people hearing me say that would have been bewildered,
and thought it not possible. No, I did
not bring her. I only said to her, if you are coming,
there is a house here which you are welcome to if
you please. What else could I do?"</p>

<p>"She is not penniless, I suppose. You might
have let her settle where she pleased."</p>

<p>"She is not penniless, but she is heedless and
heartless," said Miss Vernon with a sigh; "and as
for settling where she pleased, of course anyhow she
would have come here. And then, I never expected
she would take it."</p>

<p>"You thought she would come here, and yet you
never expected she would take it; and you knew she
would make mischief, yet you invited her to come.
That is a jumble. I don't make head or tail of it."</p>

<p>"Nor I," cried Miss Vernon, with another laugh.
"You shall carry the problem a little further, if you
please. I feared that her coming would disturb us
all, and yet I am half pleased in my heart, being
such a bad woman, that she is going to make a
disturbance to prove me right. You see I don't
spare myself."</p>

<p>"It amuses you to make out your own motives
as well as other people's: and to show how they
contradict each other," Edward said, shaking his head.</p>

<p>This little bit of metaphysics refreshed Miss
Vernon. She became quite herself again, as she
told him her story.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_63" id="Page_63">[Pg 63]</a></span></p>

<p>"The little firebrand!" she said, "the little spitfire!
facing me on my own ground, defying me,
Catherine Vernon, in the very Vernonry, my own
creation!"</p>

<p>"I wonder what the child could mean by it; it
must have been ignorance."</p>

<p>"Very likely it was ignorance: but it was more;
it was opposition, firm, healthy, instinctive opposition,
without any cause for it; that is a sort of thing
which it refreshes one to see. It must have been
born in her, don't you see? for she didn't know me,
never set eyes on me. The little wild cat! She
felt in every nerve of her that we were in opposition,
she and I."</p>

<p>"Don't you think you give too much importance
to the nonsense of a girl? I know," said Edward,
with a very serious nod of his head, "what girls are.
I have six sisters. They are strange beings. They
will go all off at a tangent in a moment. Pull a
wrong string, touch a wrong stop, and they are all
off&mdash;in a moment."</p>

<p>"You forget that I was once a girl myself."</p>

<p>"It is a long time ago, Aunt Catherine," said the
ruthless young man. "I dare say you have forgotten:
whereas I, you know, have studied the subject up
to its very last development."</p>

<p>Miss Vernon shook her head at him with a playful
menace, and then the tea was brought in, and lights.
As he went on talking, she could not refrain from a
little self-congratulation. What a wise choice she
had made! Many young men hurried out in the<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_64" id="Page_64">[Pg 64]</a></span>
evenings, made acquaintances that were not desirable,
involved themselves in indifferent society.
Edward seemed to wish for nothing better than this
soft home atmosphere, her own company, his books
and occupations. What a lucky choice! and at the
same time a choice that reflected much credit on
herself. She might just as well have chosen his
brother, who was not so irreproachable. As she sat
on the sofa and took her tea, her eyes sought the
figure of the young man, pacing quietly up and
down in the dim space, filling the house and the
room and her mind with a sensation of family completeness.
She was better off with Edward than
many a mother with her son. It was scarcely possible
for Miss Vernon to divest herself of a certain
feeling of complacency. Even the little adventure
with the stranger at the Heronry enhanced this.
Mrs. John, to whom she had been so magnanimous,
to whom she had offered shelter, had always been
against her; she had foreseen it, and if not content
with this incident, was so with herself.</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_65" id="Page_65">[Pg 65]</a></span></p>




<h2><a name="CHAPTER_V" id="CHAPTER_V">CHAPTER V.</a></h2>

<h3>NEXT MORNING.</h3>


<p>When Mrs. John awoke, confused and not knowing
where she was, very early on the next morning, she
was dismayed by the story which was instantly
poured into her half-awakened ears. Hester, it is to
be feared, had not shown that respect for her mother's
slumbers which she had enforced upon Miss Vernon.
The girl was too impatient, too eager to tell all that
had happened. "Of course I was not going to let
her come in and disturb you," she cried. "Is that
how people behave in England? She had not even
a bonnet on. No. I did not ask her to come in. It
was so late: and besides, I never heard of people
making calls at night; people you don't know."</p>

<p>"Oh, my dear!" said Mrs. John, in dismay. "Oh,
Hester! what have you done? Catherine Vernon
turned away from the door! She will never forgive
you, never, as long as she lives."</p>

<p>"I don't care," said Hester, almost sullenly. "How
was I to know? Even if I had been quite sure it<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_66" id="Page_66">[Pg 66]</a></span>
was Cousin Catherine, I should not have let the
Queen come in, to disturb you."</p>

<p>"The Queen of course would never want to come,"
said Mrs. John, who was very literal, "but Catherine
Vernon! she is more than the Queen; the house
belongs to her, and the furniture, and everything.
It is all warmed with hot-water pipes, and servants
kept, and every comfort. I shouldn't wonder if she
turned us out after what you have done."</p>

<p>"If she does, mother, I will be your servant. I
will keep good fires and keep you warm, never fear,"
cried Hester, paling and reddening in panic, yet
courage.</p>

<p>"Good fires!" said Mrs. John; "do you think
fires can be got for nothing? and we have so little
money." She looked very pale and worn, supported
among her pillows in the early morning light so
penetrating and so clear; and at this she began to
cry. "Oh, why was I so foolish as to leave you
to mismanage everything? I might have known!
Whatever Catherine Vernon wanted, you ought to
have let her have it. She can turn us out in a
moment if she pleases, and she will never forgive
you, never. And just when we were going to be so
comfortable!" the poor woman cried.</p>

<p>"Don't cry, don't cry, mamma. You know I
always said I should give lessons. We will get two
nice little rooms somewhere, much nicer than these.
If she is such a hard woman, I don't want to be
obliged to her. Oh, mother, mother, don't cry! <i>I</i>
can take care of you."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_67" id="Page_67">[Pg 67]</a></span></p>

<p>"Oh, hold your tongue, hold your tongue, child!
what do you know about it? Let me get up. I
must go to her at once and tell her you are only
a child, and constantly doing silly things."</p>

<p>This to Hester, who was so conscious of being not
only her mother's prop and support, but her real
guide in life. She was so utterly aghast, that she
did not know how to reply.</p>

<p>"Put me out my best crape," said her mother.
"Catherine will like to see that even in a foreign
place, where it is so difficult to get things as one
ought, proper respect was paid. Everybody said
that she meant to marry your poor papa when she
was young; but he saw me&mdash;Oh, dear, dear, when I
think of all that has happened since then&mdash;and she
never has liked me. I think that was quite natural:
and now that you have gone and made everything
worse&mdash;Put me out my best dress with the crape."</p>

<p>"It is only five o'clock," said Hester, half penitent,
half irritated, "there is nobody up. The people in
England must be very lazy in the morning. Does
no one go to early mass?"</p>

<p>"Five o'clock!" said Mrs. John, fretfully. "I
think you must be going out of your senses, Hester.
Is that an hour to wake me, when I have not had
my first sleep out? Draw down the blinds and close
the shutters, and let me get a proper rest. And for
goodness' sake," she cried, raising her head before
she settled down comfortably among the pillows, "for
goodness' sake! don't go about talking of early
mass here."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_68" id="Page_68">[Pg 68]</a></span></p>

<p>Hester did as her mother ordered, but with an
impatient heart. It was bitter to have thus put into
the hands of the poor lady who was her kingdom,
and for whom she had legislated for years, the means
of shaking off her sway&mdash;a sway which Hester was
firmly persuaded was for her good. John Vernon
had not been much of a guide for either mother or
child. He had not cared very much about them.
His wife's monotonous feebleness which might have
been well enough in the tranquillity of the luxurious
sheltered life at home to which she was born, was
nothing but tiresome in circumstances where an
energetic woman might have been of some use; and
his daughter was a creature he did not understand&mdash;a
child, a chit, who ventured to look disapproval at
him, to his indignation and wonder. What you are
used to from your birth does not affect you much,
and Hester had not suffered any heartache from her
father's neglect. She accepted it as the order of
nature, but the result had been that from her earliest
consciousness almost, she had taken upon herself the
charge of her mother; and to be thus threatened
with deposition, and criticised by her helpless subject,
appalled her. So active and young as she was, and
full of superfluous strength, it was impossible for
her to return to her pillow as her mother had done.
When she had closed the shutters and drawn the
curtains, she stole softly out on tiptoe down the old
oak staircase which creaked at every footfall. In the
glory of the early morning the house was not dark.
In rooms which the sun had reached, the black old<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_69" id="Page_69">[Pg 69]</a></span>
wainscot was glimmering full of reflections, and all
the world out of doors lay resplendent in that early
gladness. Hester had heard all her life from many a
discontented mouth, of the gloomy skies and dark
days of England, of a climate always obscured with
fog, and a sky where there was no blue. Accordingly
it was with a kind of indignant ecstasy that she
stepped out into the intense delicious radiance, so
soft and fresh, yet so all-powerful. The birds had
got their early morning twitterings over, and were in
full outburst of song. The flowers were all in intensest
dewy bloom, and everything taking the good of
that sweet prime of the morning in which they
bloomed and sang for themselves, and not officially on
behalf of the world. The girl forgot her vexation as
she came out to the incense-breathing garden, to the
trees no longer standing out black upon the sunset,
but in all their sweet natural variations of colour,
basking in the morning light. The pond even, that
had looked so black, was like a basin of pure gold,
rimmed with rich browns and greens. She opened
the gate and looked out upon the road which was all
silent, not a shadow upon it, swept by the broad early
blaze of the morning sun. Not a sound except the
chorus of the birds, the crackle of the furze bushes
in the stillness, the hum of insects. She had all the
world to herself, as the poet had on that immortal
morning when the houses of quiet London all lay
asleep, and the Thames flowed onward at his own
sweet will. Standing apart from the road, among its
shrubberies, was the Grange with its red gables and<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_70" id="Page_70">[Pg 70]</a></span>
its eyelids closed&mdash;farther off the light rebounded
softly from the roofs of the town, and behind the
town, revealed in partial shadow, rose the white
distant front of the house in which her mother had
told Hester her early married life had been passed.
She had it all to herself, nobody to disturb or interrupt.
And what in human form could have given a
more complete impersonation of the morning than
this girl, fresh, fair, and strong, with such a world of
latent possibilities in her? The cloud of last night's
perversity blew away. She met the eye of the day
with a gaze as open and as confident. Neither
Nature nor Hester had any fear. She was like her
namesake in the poem, whom the "gentle-hearted
Charles" beloved of all men, could not, though she
was dead, give up the expectation of meeting as
heretofore, "some summer morning."</p>

<div class="poetry-container">
 <div class="poetry">
  <div class="stanza">
<div class="verse">"When from thy cheerful eyes a ray<br /></div>
<div class="verse">Had struck a bliss upon the day,<br /></div>
<div class="verse">A bliss that would not go away,<br /></div>
<div class="verse i2">A sweet forewarning."<br /></div>
  </div>
 </div>
</div>

<p>And this glorified world, this land of light and
dews, this quiet sweetness and silence and ecstatic
life, was the dull England of which all the shabby
exiles spoke with scorn! Hester felt a delightful
indignation flood her soul. She went out all by
herself with a little awe, and walked round the Common
which was all agleam with blobs of moisture
shining like diamonds in the sun:&mdash;</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_71" id="Page_71">[Pg 71]</a></span></p>

<div class="poetry-container">
 <div class="poetry">
  <div class="stanza">
<div class="verse">"A springy motion in her gait<br /></div>
<div class="verse">A rising step did indicate,<br /></div>
<div class="verse">Of pride and joy no common rate<br /></div>
<div class="verse i2">That flushed her spirit.<br /></div>
  </div>
  <div class="stanza">
<div class="verse">"I know not by what name beside<br /></div>
<div class="verse">I shall it call: if 'twas not pride<br /></div>
<div class="verse">It was a joy to that allied<br /></div>
<div class="verse i2">She did inherit."<br /></div>
  </div>
 </div>
</div>

<p>Hester was a great deal too young for a heroine,
but as it chances there could not be a better portrait
of her than that of Lamb's "sprightly neighbour."
She went out with that springing motion, stepping
on air, with the pride of life and youth and conscious
energy in every vein. A certain youthful contempt
for the inferior beings who lay stupid behind those
closed shutters, losing all this bloom and glory, was
in her heart. She was very black in the midst of
the bright landscape in her mourning frock, with a
white kerchief tied round her throat like a French
girl, but her curly locks shining like everything else
in the sun. She did not mind the sun. She had
not yet learned that she had a complexion to care
for; besides, the sun could do nothing to the
creamy-white of her tint. Perhaps she was not
very sensitive, not thin-skinned at all, either in
body or soul.</p>

<p>Now it happened, curiously enough, that as Hester
passed the gate of the Grange, at which she gazed
very anxiously with a half-formed intention of
making her way in, in face of every obstacle, and
making her peace with Cousin Catherine&mdash;a project
which only the early hour prevented her from<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_72" id="Page_72">[Pg 72]</a></span>
carrying out&mdash;the said gate opened softly and a man
appeared. Hester was more startled than she could
explain to herself. Why should she be startled? It
was not so early now&mdash;six o'clock or later. He was
a young man of middle height, with a very dark
beard and bright eyes. Hester felt that he was
somewhat unsuitable to the scene, not English in her
opinion&mdash;Englishmen had fair hair, rosy complexions,
blue eyes&mdash;they were all <i>blonds</i>: now this man looked
like those to whom she was accustomed. Was he,
she wondered, going to early mass? He had a portfolio
in his hand, a small box strapped to his shoulders.
The first Englishman she had seen; what was he
going to do? What he did first was to look at her
with considerable curiosity. She had hastily put on
her hat on seeing him, that there might be no impropriety
in her appearance, an action which put out, so
to speak, one of the lights in the landscape, for her
hair was shining almost as brightly as the blobs of
dew. He crossed the road to the Common, and then
he paused a moment on the edge of it and looked at
her again.</p>

<p>"I wonder if you are my little cousin," he said.</p>

<p>It was on Hester's lips to protest that she was not
little at all, but quite as tall as he was, but she
waived this point on second thoughts.</p>

<p>"Are you a Vernon&mdash;<i>too</i>?" she said.</p>

<p>"Yes, I am a Vernon&mdash;too. Edward, at your
service. I am glad to see you keep such early hours."</p>

<p>"Why?" she asked, but did not wait for any reply.
"What are you going to do?"</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_73" id="Page_73">[Pg 73]</a></span></p>

<p>"I am going," he said, "out upon the Common to
look for a rare flower that grows here, only I have
never been able to find it. Will you come and help
me?"</p>

<p>"A flower!" said Hester, confounded. "Do
Englishmen look for flowers?"</p>

<p>"Englishmen as well as others&mdash;when they happen
to be botanists. Does that surprise you? I am
obliged to get up early, for I have no time in the
day."</p>

<p>"What do you do in the day?" the girl asked.</p>

<p>"I am at the bank. Have you never heard of
Vernon's Bank? the business from which we all
take our importance here. The Vernons are great
or they are small, don't you know? according to their
connection with the bank."</p>

<p>"Then you are one of the great ones," said Hester
with decision. "Do any of the Vernons live in that
great white house&mdash;that one, do you see?&mdash;on the
other side of the red roofs?"</p>

<p>"The White House? Oh yes, Harry lives there,
another cousin, and his sister."</p>

<p>"Are they in the bank too?"</p>

<p>"Harry is; he and I do the work between us.
Ladies in this country have nothing to do with business&mdash;&mdash;by
the way, I am forgetting Aunt Catherine."</p>

<p>"That is a pity," said Hester, not noticing his
exclamation. "Then I suppose my father must have
had something to do with it, for do you know,
though we are poor now, he once lived there?"</p>

<p>"Yes, I know."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_74" id="Page_74">[Pg 74]</a></span></p>

<p>"Then why did he go away?" said Hester
musingly; "that is what I should like to find out.
Do you know Cousin Catherine? you must, if you
live in her house."</p>

<p>"I call her Aunt Catherine," said the young man.</p>

<p>"Why? Is she your aunt? And I call her
cousin; but she cannot be my cousin. She is so
much older. Was she angry&mdash;do you know&mdash;last
night? I did not know who she was&mdash;and I was&mdash;rude."</p>

<p>He laughed, and she, after a doubtful glance,
laughed too.</p>

<p>"Oh yes, I am afraid I did know who she was&mdash;that
she was Cousin Catherine; but then, who is
Cousin Catherine? I had never seen her before.
Mother thinks she will be very angry. Could I
let her come in and disturb my mother after she
was in bed? Mother thinks she will not let us
stay."</p>

<p>"Should you be sorry to go?"</p>

<p>Hester cast a long look all round from east to
west, taking in the breadth of the Common glistening
in the morning dew, the dark roofs of the Heronry
against the trees, the glittering vanes and windows of
the town on the other side.</p>

<p>"It is very pretty," she said with a little sigh. "And
to think what they say of England! They say it is
always fog, and the sun never shines. How can
people tell such lies? We should not go, we should
take some small rooms in the town, and I would
teach."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_75" id="Page_75">[Pg 75]</a></span></p>

<p>"What could you teach?"</p>

<p>Hester looked at him with half resentment.</p>

<p>"Do you know many languages?" she said.</p>

<p>"Many languages? no!&mdash;a smattering of Greek
and Latin."</p>

<p>"I don't call them languages. I mean French
and Italian and German: for I know them all. I
know them as well as English. I haven't a bit of
the accent Britannique: Madame Alphonse said so,
and I hope she is a good authority. I will give
<i>cours</i>, as many as they please: French one day and
the others the next. Not only should I be able to
help mother, but I should make a fortune, they all
said. Three <i>cours</i> always going: I should make a
great deal of money, and then in ten years or so I
could retire, you know. In ten years I should only
be"&mdash;here she paused in the fervour of conversation
and eyed him a little with doubt in her face. Then
she said quite calmly, "I forget the rest."</p>

<p>Edward Vernon listened with great edification;
he forgot the flower which he was going to search
for.</p>

<p>"I am very sorry to discourage you in your plans:
but I don't think Aunt Catherine will turn you out."</p>

<p>"Don't you think so?"</p>

<p>Hester, after her brag, which was perfectly sincere,
and of which she believed every word, felt a little
disappointed to be thus brought down again.</p>

<p>"No, I don't think so. She told me that you
were rude, but she was not angry; she only
laughed."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_76" id="Page_76">[Pg 76]</a></span></p>

<p>At this Hester grew wildly red, and stamped her
foot. "She shall not&mdash;she shall not&mdash;nobody shall
laugh at me!" she cried. "I will tell mother we
must go away."</p>

<p>"Don't go away. You must consider that your
mother will be a great deal more comfortable here
than in lodgings in town. And you know you are
very young. You had better be a little older before
you begin to give <i>cours</i>. Don't be angry: but if
you were to mount up to the desk with your short
frock" (here Hester looked down at her feet, and in
a sudden agony perceived the difference between her
broad, old-fashioned shoes, and the pointed toes of
her companion) "and short hair&mdash;&mdash;" But this was
more than she could bear.</p>

<p>"You are laughing at me! You too!" she said,
with a poignant tone of mortification.</p>

<p>"No, my little cousin, I will not laugh; but you
must let me be your friend, and show you what is
best; for you <i>are</i> very young, you know. One can't
know everything at&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Fourteen," said Hester. "Fourteen is not so
very young; and girls are older than boys. Perhaps
you are thinking that a boy of fourteen is not much?
That is very true; but it is different with me.
Mother is not strong. I have to do most of the
settling, not to tire her. What I think is always
what will be the best&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"For her? To be sure," said Edward; "so you
must make up your mind to be civil to everybody,
and not to quarrel."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_77" id="Page_77">[Pg 77]</a></span></p>

<p>"Quarrel! I never quarrel. I would not for
anything in the world; it is so childish."</p>

<p>"I don't think I shall find my flower this morning,"
he said. "I will walk home with you if you
will let me, and we can talk about everything. Have
you seen the other people who live in the Heronry?
Some of them will amuse you. There are two old
ladies&mdash;Vernons, like the rest of us."</p>

<p>"Is it Cousin Catherine that has brought us all
here?"</p>

<p>"All of us. She is not a person to be made light
of, you see."</p>

<p>"And why did she bring <i>you</i>? Were you poor?
Had you no father like me? Is she fond of you that
she has you to live in her house? Do you love
her?" said Hester, fixing her large curious eyes on
the young man's face.</p>

<p>He laughed. "Where am I to begin?" he said.
"I have a father and mother, little cousin. They
are not poor precisely, but neither are they rich. I
can't tell you whether Aunt Catherine is fond of
me. She brought me here to work in the bank; the
bank is everybody's first thought; that must be kept
up whatever fails; and she was so good as to think
I would do. It was a great advancement for me. If
I had stayed at home I should have had to struggle
for something to do along with all the other young
men. And there are a great many young men in
the world, and not so much for them to do as could
be wished. Have I satisfied you now?"</p>

<p>"There is one question you have not answered,"<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_78" id="Page_78">[Pg 78]</a></span>
said Hester. "Do you love her?&mdash;that is the chief
thing I want to know."</p>

<p>"Love her? Come, you must not go into metaphysics.
I like her very much. Aunts are excellent
things. I have a great respect for her. Won't
that do?"</p>

<p>"I looked at her last night," said Hester. "I got
her by heart. I shall either love her or hate her.
I have not made up my mind which."</p>

<p>"There is something between these violent sentiments,"
said Edward; "at least I hope so. You
must not hate me."</p>

<p>"Oh, you!" said Hester, with friendly contempt,
"that is a different thing altogether. You are not
of any consequence. I think I like you, but you
may be sure I shall never hate you; why should I?
You can't do anything to me. But when there is
one that is&mdash;that is&mdash;well, almost like God, you
know&mdash;" said the girl, dropping her voice reverentially.
"It is astonishing, is it not, that one should
be so much more powerful than others? They say
in France that men are all equal; but how can that
be when Cousin Catherine&mdash;What gives her so much
power?"</p>

<p>"That is all a fallacy about men being equal.
You will see through it when you get older," said
Edward, with gentle superiority. He had laughed
at her cavalier mention of himself, but he was very
willing to instruct this self-opinioned young person.
"You are mixing up circumstances and principles,"
he added. "It is circumstances which make Aunt<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_79" id="Page_79">[Pg 79]</a></span>
Catherine powerful; chiefly because she is rich&mdash;rich
and kind; very kind in her way; always ready
to do a charitable action."</p>

<p>The colour wavered in Hester's cheek. "We don't
want charity," she said; and after this walked on
very stately, holding her head high. The Vernonry
towards which they were going had begun to wake
up. Smoke was rising up into the clear air from one
or two of the chimneys; a few blinds had been drawn
up; a gardener, with his wheelbarrow and his scythe
stood in the gate, throwing his shadow across the
garden. Edward Vernon thought there was in the
air a vague perfume from the cups of tea that were
being carried about in all directions to the bedsides
of the inhabitants. The people in the Vernonry
were all elderly; they were all fond of their little
comforts. They liked to open their eyes upon the
world through the refreshing vapour of those early
cups. All elderly&mdash;all except this impersonation of
freshness and youth. What was she to do in such a
place, amid the retired and declining, with energy
enough for every active employment, and a restless,
high, youthful spirit? Poor girl! she would have
some bitter lessons to learn. Edward, though he had
won the heart of his powerful relation by his domestic
character and evident preference for her society, had
not been able to divest himself of a certain grudge
against the author of his good fortune. The feeling
which Hester expressed so innocently was in his
mind in a more serious form.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_80" id="Page_80">[Pg 80]</a></span></p>

<p>When they reached the gate, Hester stopped
short.</p>

<p>"You must not come in now," she said in her
peremptory tones, "for mother is not up yet. I
must go and make her coffee before she gets up.
I will make you some, after dinner if you like.
You cannot make coffee in England, can you?"</p>

<p>"No more than we can make the sun shine," said
Edward with a smile. "I shall certainly come for
my coffee in the evening. I may be of some use to
you as your difficulties increase; but I should like
to know your name, and what I am to call you?"</p>

<p>"Are you sure that our difficulties will increase?"
said Hester, aghast, opening her mouth as well as
her large eyes.</p>

<p>"Unless you know how to deal with them. I
shall set up a series of lectures on fine manners and
deportment."</p>

<p>Hester's countenance flamed upon him with
mingled resentment and shame.</p>

<p>"Do you think me a savage?" she said. "I&mdash;do
you know I have been brought up in France? It is
in England that there are no manners, no politeness."</p>

<p>"And no sunshine," said Edward with a laugh.
Thus saying he took off his hat with a little exaggeration
of respect, and waving his hand to her,
turned away. If Hester had been older, she would
have known that to stand and look after him was
not according to any code. But at fourteen the soul<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_81" id="Page_81">[Pg 81]</a></span>
is bold and scorns conventional rule. She stood,
shading her eyes with her hand, watching him as he
walked along; still the only figure that broke the
blaze and the silence of the morning. It was true,
as she had said, that he was not of any consequence.
Perhaps that was why she felt quite at her ease in
respect to him, and on the whole approved of him as
a pleasant feature in the new life.</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_82" id="Page_82">[Pg 82]</a></span></p>




<h2><a name="CHAPTER_VI" id="CHAPTER_VI">CHAPTER VI.</a></h2>

<h3>NEIGHBOURS AND RELATIONS.</h3>


<p>In the morning, the inhabitants of the Vernonry
were to be seen a little before or after noon, according
to the season, appearing and disappearing in the
immediate neighbourhood of their house. It was
a little community perfectly at leisure, called out by
no work in the morning, returning with no more
punctuality than pleased them. As a matter of
fact they were exceedingly punctual, coming and
going as by clockwork, supporting their otherwise
limp existence by a severe mechanism of rule. Those
who have least to do, are often most rigorous in thus
measuring themselves out; it gives a certain sense
of something real in their lives. It was a little after
eleven when Mr. Mildmay Vernon appeared. His
residence was in the west wing, nearest to the pool
and the trees, and he thought it was probably owing
to the proximity of the water that his rheumatism
troubled him so much in winter. It did not trouble
him at this fine season, but he had the habit of<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_83" id="Page_83">[Pg 83]</a></span>
leaning on his stick and talking in a querulous voice.
He came out with his newspaper to a little summer-house
where the heat was tempered by the foliage
of a great lime. He had very good taste; he liked
the flicker of the sunshine which came through those
green-silken leaves, and the shelter was very grateful
when the sun was hot. The worst of it was
that the summer-house was not in his portion of the
common grounds, and the ladies, to whom it ought
to have belonged, and to whom it was so convenient
to do their work in, resented his constant presence.
In winter, he seated himself always on a sunny
bench which was in front of the windows now belonging
to Mrs. John, but she was not as yet aware
of this peculiarity. The Miss Vernon-Ridgways
occupied the space between Mr. Mildmay's house
and Mrs. John's. They were not in the direct line,
and they felt that they were treated accordingly,
the best of everything being appropriated to those
whom Catherine Vernon, who was so proud of her
name, considered nearest to the family stock. These
ladies were convinced that the blood of the Ridgways
had much enriched the liquid that meandered
through the veins of the Vernons; but in Catherine
Vernon's presence they kept silence as to this belief.
The rooms in the wings were much the best, they
thought, and they had even proposed an exchange
to Mr. Mildmay when he complained of being so close
to the pool. But he had only grinned and had not
accepted; he knew better. Of course he would
have grumbled if he had been lodged in Windsor<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_84" id="Page_84">[Pg 84]</a></span>
Castle, the ladies said; but he knew very well in
his heart that he had been preferred to the best
place. On the other side of the house, towards the
road, lived Mrs. Reginald Vernon, the young widow
of an officer, with her four children, of whom everybody
complained, and an old couple, in reality not
Vernons at all, but relations of Catherine's mother
who were looked down upon by the entire community,
and had clearly no business in the Vernonry.
The old gentleman, Captain Morgan, had been in
the navy, and therefore ought to have been the equal
of any one. But the people on the road side kept
themselves very much to themselves; the aristocracy
lived on the garden front. When Mrs. John Vernon
made her appearance in her deep mourning, there
was a great deal of excitement about the place.
Mr. Mildmay put down his paper and came out,
bowing, to the door of the summer-house.</p>

<p>"Between relations I do not know if any ceremony
of introduction is necessary," he said. "It
gives me great pleasure to welcome you back to
England. Poor John and I were once great friends.
I hope you will allow me to consider myself at once
an old acquaintance."</p>

<p>"Oh, how thankful I shall be for some one to
speak to!" cried Mrs. John. "Though my family
were of this county, I seem to have lost sight of
every one that used to know me. A great many
changes happen when one has been thirty years
away."</p>

<p>"Poor John! I suppose he never came back to<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_85" id="Page_85">[Pg 85]</a></span>
this country again?" Mr. Mildmay said, with
sympathetic curiosity, and that air of knowing all
about it which is sometimes so offensive; but
Mrs. John was simple-minded. She was not
even displeased by the undertone of confidential
understanding.</p>

<p>"Never! it would have broken his heart; what
was left to him to come for? He always said that
when ladies meddle with business everything goes
wrong. But, dear me, I oughtn't to say so here,"
Mrs. John added, with a little panic, looking round.</p>

<p>"Why?&mdash;you need not be afraid of expressing
your sentiments, my dear lady, before me. I have
the greatest respect for the ladies&mdash;where would we
without them? 'Oh, woman, in our hours of ease,'
&amp;c.&mdash;you know. But I think that mixed up with
business they are entirely out of their place. It
changes the natural relations&mdash;it creates a false
position&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"John always thought so. But then I was so
silly&mdash;so dreadfully silly&mdash;about business; and he
thought that women should all be like me."</p>

<p>"That is certainly the kind of woman that is most
attractive to men," said Mr. Mildmay, with a gallant
bow; "and in my time ladies thought much of
that. I hope, however, that you will like this
retirement, and be happy here. It is very retired,
you see&mdash;nothing to disturb us&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Oh, Mr. Mildmay, I dare say I shall do very
well," said Mrs. John, putting her handkerchief to
her eyes; "but seeing <i>that</i>" (she waved her hand<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_86" id="Page_86">[Pg 86]</a></span>
towards the front of the White House in the
distance) "from the window, and knowing every
day how things are going on at the bank, and all
the old associations, I cannot be expected to be
very happy. That was not thought of when I
came here."</p>

<p>"My dear lady!" Mr. Mildmay said, soothingly;
and then he saw his way to inflicting another pin-prick
upon this bleeding heart so easily laid open
to him. "I suppose you know that Catherine has
put her nephew Harry and his sister&mdash;he is no more
her nephew than I am&mdash;one of Gilbert Vernon's
boys: but she took a fancy to him&mdash;in the White
House? It belongs to her now, like everything
else in the neighbourhood. Almost the whole of
Redborough is in her hands."</p>

<p>"Her nephew?" said Mrs. John, faintly, "but
she has no nephew&mdash;she was an only child. My
Hester is nearer to her than any one else." Then
she paused, and added with conscious magnanimity,
"Since I cannot have it, it doesn't matter to me
who has got it. We must make ourselves as
contented as we can&mdash;Hester and I."</p>

<p>It was at this moment that the two ladies
appeared who considered the summer-house their
special property. They were tall women with
pronounced features and a continual smile&mdash;in
dresses which had a way of looking scanty, and
were exactly the same. Their necks were long and
their noses large, both which characteristics they
held to be evidences of family and condition. They<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_87" id="Page_87">[Pg 87]</a></span>
followed each other, one always a step in advance of
the other with a certain pose of their long necks
and turn of their shoulders which made some people
think of the flight of two long-necked birds. Mr.
Mildmay Vernon, who pretended to some scholarship,
called them the Cranes of Ibycus. They arrived
thus at the peaceful spot all chequered with morning
light and shade, as with a swoop of wings.</p>

<p>"Dear lady!" said Miss Matilda, "we should
have waited till we could make a formal call and
requested the pleasure of making your acquaintance
as we ought; but when we saw you in our summer-house,
we felt sure that you did not understand the
distribution of the place, and we hurried out to say
that we are delighted to see you in it, and <i>quite</i>
glad that you should use it as much as ever you
please."</p>

<p>"Oh!" cried Mrs. John, much disturbed, "I am
so sorry if I have intruded. I had not the least
idea&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"<i>That</i> we were sure you had not&mdash;for everybody
knows that Mrs. John Vernon is a lady," said the
other. "It is awkward to have no one to introduce
us, but we must just introduce each other. Miss
Martha Vernon-Ridgway, Mrs. Vernon; and I am
Matilda," said the spokeswoman, with a curtsey.
"We are very glad to see you here."</p>

<p>At this Mrs. John made her curtsey too, but
being unready, found nothing to say: for she could
not be supposed to be glad to see them, as everybody
knew the sad circumstances in which she had<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_88" id="Page_88">[Pg 88]</a></span>
returned to her former home: and she seated herself
again after her curtsey, wishing much that Hester
was with her. Hester had a happy knack of either
knowing or suggesting something to say.</p>

<p>"We hope you will find yourself comfortable,"
said the two ladies, who by dint of always beginning
to speak together had the air of making their
remarks in common; but Miss Matilda had better
wind and a firmer disposition than her sister, and
always carried the day. "You are lucky in having
the end house, which has all the fresh air. I
am sure we do not grudge you anything, but it
always makes us feel how we are boxed up; that is
our house between the wings. It is monotonous to
see nothing but the garden&mdash;but we don't complain."</p>

<p>"I am sure I am very sorry," Mrs. John began
to say.</p>

<p>"Your favourable opinion of the end houses is
very complimentary," said Mr. Mildmay. "I wish
it were founded on fact. My windows look into the
pool and draw all the miasma out of it. When I
have a fire I feel it come in. But I say nothing.
What would be the good of it? We are not here
only to please ourselves. Beggars should not be
choosers."</p>

<p>"I hope, Mr. Mildmay Vernon, that you will speak
for yourself," said the sisters. "We do not consider
that such an appellation applies to us. We are not
obliged, I beg to say," Miss Matilda added, "to live
anywhere that does not suit us. If we come here as
a favour to Catherine Vernon, who makes such a<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_89" id="Page_89">[Pg 89]</a></span>
point of having all her relations about her, it is not
that we are beggars, or anything of the sort."</p>

<p>"Dear, dear me!" said Mrs. John, clasping her
hands, "I hope nobody thinks that is the case. For
my poor dear husband's sake, and for Hester's sake,
I could never submit&mdash;; Catherine offered the house
out of kindness&mdash;nothing but that."</p>

<p>"Oh, nothing but that," said Mr. Mildmay Vernon,
with a sneer.</p>

<p>"Nothing at all but that," said the Miss Vernon-Ridgways.
"She said to us, I am sure, that it would
be a favour to herself&mdash;a personal favour. Don't you
remember, Martha? Nothing else would induce us,
as you may suppose, Mrs. John&mdash;my sister and me,
who have many friends and resources&mdash;to put up
with a little poky place&mdash;the worst, quite the worst,
here. But dear Catherine is very lonely. She is
not a person, you know, that can do with everybody.
You must understand her before you can get on with
her. Shouldn't you say so? And she is perhaps,
you know, a little too fond of her own way. People
who can't make allowances as relatives do, are apt
not to&mdash;like her, in short. And it is such a great
stand-by for her&mdash;such a comfort, to have us here."</p>

<p>"I should have thought she was very&mdash;independent,"
said Mrs. John, faltering a little. She did
not even venture to risk an opinion; but something
she was obliged to say. "But I can scarcely say I
know her," she added, anxiously, "for it is thirty
years since I was at Redborough, and people change
so much. She was young then."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_90" id="Page_90">[Pg 90]</a></span></p>

<p>"Young! she must have been nearly forty. Her
character must have been what one may call formed
by that time," said Mr. Mildmay; "but I know
what you mean. Our dear Catherine whom we are
all so fond of&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"You are quite right," said Miss Matilda, emphatically,
"<i>quite</i> right, though perhaps you mean
something different, for gentlemen are always so
strange. We <i>are</i> very fond of dear Catherine. All
the more that so many people misunderstand her,
and take wrong ideas. I think indeed that you
require to be a relation, to enter into the peculiarities
of the case, and take everything into
consideration, before you can do dear Catherine
justice. She is so good, but under such a <i>brusque</i>
exterior. Though she never <i>means</i> to hurt any one's
feelings&mdash;that I am certain of."</p>

<p>"Oh <i>never</i>!" cried Mr. Mildmay, with mock
enthusiasm, lifting up his hands and eyes.</p>

<p>Mrs. John looked, as each spoke, from one to the
other with a great deal of perplexity. It had seemed
to her simple mind at first that it was with a real
enthusiasm that their general benefactress was being
discussed; but by this time she had begun to feel
the influence of the undertone. She was foolish,
but there was no rancour in her mind. So gentle a
little shaft as that which she had herself shot, in
vindication, as she thought of her husband, rather
than as assailing his successor, she might be capable
of; but systematic disparagement puzzled the poor
lady. She looked first at the Miss Vernon-Ridgways,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_91" id="Page_91">[Pg 91]</a></span>
and then at Mr. Mildmay Vernon, with a bewildered
look, trying to make out what they meant. And
then she was moved to make to the conversation a
contribution of her own&mdash;</p>

<p>"I am afraid my little girl made a sad mistake
last night," she said. "Catherine was so kind as
to come to see me&mdash;without ceremony&mdash;and I had
gone to bed."</p>

<p>"That was so like Catherine!" the Miss Vernon-Ridgways
cried. "Now anybody else would have
come next day at soonest to let you have time to
rest and get over your journey. But that is just
what she would be sure to do. Impatience is a
great defect in her character, it must be allowed.
She wanted you to be delighted, and to tell her how
beautiful everything was. It must be confessed it is
a little tiresome. You must praise everything, and
tell her you are <i>so</i> comfortable. One wouldn't like
it in anybody else."</p>

<p>"But what I regret so much," continued poor Mrs.
John, "is that Hester, my little girl, who had never
heard of Catherine&mdash;she is tall, but she is only
fourteen, and such a child! Don't you know she
would not let her in? I am afraid she was quite
rude to her."</p>

<p>Here Mrs. John's artless story was interrupted by
a series of little cheers from Mr. Mildmay, and titters
from the two sisters.</p>

<p>"Brava!" he said. "Well done!" taking away
Mrs. John's breath; while the two ladies uttered<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_92" id="Page_92">[Pg 92]</a></span>
little laughs and titterings, and exchanged glances
of pleasure.</p>

<p>"Oh, how very funny!" they cried. "Oh, what
an amusing thing to happen! Dear Catherine, what
a snub for her! How I wish we had been there
to see."</p>

<p>"I should like to make acquaintance with your
little Hester, my dear lady," said Mr. Mildmay.
"She must have a fine spirit. Our respected Cousin
Catherine is only human, and we all feel that to
be opposed now and then would be for her moral
advantage. We flatter her ourselves, being grown-up
persons: but we like to know that she encounters
something now and then that will be for her good."</p>

<p>"I must again ask you to speak for yourself, Mr.
Mildmay," said the sisters; "flattery is not an art I
am acquainted with. Dear, dear, what a sad thing
for a beginning. How nervous it must have made
you! and knowing that dear Catherine, though she
is so generous, <i>cannot</i> forgive a jest. She has no
sense of humour; it is a great pity. She will not, I
fear, see the fun of it as we do."</p>

<p>"Do you think," said Mrs. John, with a little
tremor, "that she will be dreadfully angry? Hester
is such a child&mdash;and then, she didn't know."</p>

<p>The sisters both shook their heads upon their long
necks. They wished no particular harm to Mrs.
John; but they would not have been sorry so to
frighten her, as that she should go away as she came.
And they sincerely believed Catherine to be as they<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_93" id="Page_93">[Pg 93]</a></span>
represented her. Few people are capable of misrepresenting
goodness in the barefaced way of saying
one thing while they believe another. Most commonly
they have made out of shreds and patches of
observation and dislike, a fictitious figure meriting
all their anger and contempt, to which they attach
the unloved name. Catherine Vernon, according to
their picture of her, was a woman who, being richer
than they, helped them all with an ostentatious
benevolence, which was her justification for humiliating
them whenever she had a chance, and treating
them at all times as her inferiors and pensioners.
Perhaps they would themselves have done so in
Catherine Vernon's place. This at all events was
the way in which they had painted her to themselves.
They had grown to believe that she was all
this, and to expect her to act in accordance with the
character they had given her. When the sun shone
into the summer-house, and routed the little company,
which happened just about the time when the
meal which they called luncheon, but which to most
of them was dinner, was ready, Mrs. John carried
back with her to her new home a tremulous conviction
that any sort of vengeance was possible. She
might be turned out of this shelter, or she might be
made to feel that her life was a burden. And yet
when she got back to the low cool room in which
Hester, doubtful of Betsey's powers, was superintending
the laying out of the table, it seemed to
her, in the prospect of losing it, more desirable than<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_94" id="Page_94">[Pg 94]</a></span>
it had been before. There were three windows in
deep recesses, one of them with a cheerful outlook
along the road that skirted the Common, in which
was placed a soft, luxurious chair, which was exactly
what Mrs. John liked. Nothing could have been
more grateful, coming out of the sunshine, than the
coolness of this brown room, with all the little
glimmers of light in the polished wainscot, and the
pretty old-fashioned furniture. Mrs. John sighed as
she placed herself in the chair at the window. And
the smell of the dish which Betsey soon after put
upon the table was very appetising. It turned out
to be nicely cooked, and the table was laid with fine
linen and pretty crystal and old-fashioned silver&mdash;everything
complete. The poor lady in her wandering
and unsettled life had lost almost all this needful
garniture which makes life so much more seemly
and smooth. She had been used to lodging-houses,
to <i>pensions</i>, greasy and public, to the vulgarity of
inns; and all this daintiness and freshness charmed
her with a sense of repose and personal property.
She could have cried to think that it might be put
in jeopardy by Hester's childish petulance.</p>

<p>"Oh, why did I let you persuade me to go to bed?
Why didn't I stay up&mdash;I could have done it quite
well&mdash;and seen Catherine Vernon? Why are you so
self-willed, child? I think I could be happy here,
at least as happy as I can ever be now; and what if
I must give it all up again for you?"</p>

<p>"Mother, if we have to give it up, we will do<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_95" id="Page_95">[Pg 95]</a></span>
better," said Hester, a little pale; "we shall get
pretty lodgings like Ruth Pinch, and I will give
lessons; and it will not matter about Cousin
Catherine."</p>

<p>"Oh, child, child, what do you know about it!"
Mrs. John said.</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_96" id="Page_96">[Pg 96]</a></span></p>




<h2><a name="CHAPTER_VII" id="CHAPTER_VII">CHAPTER VII.</a></h2>

<h3>SETTLING DOWN.</h3>


<p>These alarms, however, did not come to anything,
and as the days passed on Mrs. John accustomed
herself to her new position and settled down to it
quietly. She got used to the little meetings in the
summer-house or on the bench in front of her own
windows, and soon learned to remark with the others
upon the freedom with which Mr. Mildmay Vernon
took the best place, not taking any trouble to remark
to whom it really belonged. He was a great advantage
to the ladies of the Vernonry in giving them
a subject upon which they could always be eloquent.
Even when they could not talk of it openly, they
would give each other little looks aside, with many
nods of the head and an occasional biting innuendo;
and this amused the ladies wonderfully, and kept
them perhaps now and then from criticising each
other, as such close neighbours could scarcely fail to
do. But even more interesting than Mr. Mildmay
Vernon and his mannish selfishness was Catherine,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_97" id="Page_97">[Pg 97]</a></span>
the universal subject on which they could fraternise
even with Mildmay Vernon himself. He was caustic,
and attacked her keenly; but the sisters never
failed to profess a great affection for their cousin,
declaring that from Catherine one accepted anything,
since one felt that it was only her <i>gauche</i> way
of doing things, or the fault of her education, but
that she always meant well. Dear Catherine! it
was such a pity, they said. Mrs. John never quite
adopted either style of remark, but the subject was
endless, and always afforded something to say; and
there was a little pleasure in hearing Catherine set
down from her superior place, even though a gentler
disposition and simpler mind prevented Mrs. John
herself from adding to the felicities of the discussion.
Catherine had taken no notice of the unlucky beginning
which had given so much alarm to Mrs. John,
and so much amusement to the other members of
the establishment. When she came in state to call
on the mourner, which she did a few days after, with
that amused toleration of the little weaknesses of her
dependents which was as natural in Catherine's
position as the eager and somewhat spiteful discussion
of her was in theirs, Miss Vernon had tapped
Hester on the cheek, and said, "This is the good
child who would not let me disturb her mother."
But when Mrs. John began to apologise and explain,
Catherine had stopped her, saying, "She was quite
right," with a decisive brevity, and turning to
another subject. The magnanimity of this would
have touched Hester's heart, but for the half-mocking<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_98" id="Page_98">[Pg 98]</a></span>
smile and air of amusement with which it was
said, and which made the girl much angrier than
before. It cannot be denied that this was to some
extent the tone unconsciously adopted by Catherine
in her dealings with the poor relations who were so
largely indebted to her bounty. There was a great
deal that was ridiculous in their little affectations
and discontents, and the half-resentment, half-exaction
with which they received her benefits.
These might have made her close her heart against
them, and turned her into a misanthrope; but
though the effect produced was different from this,
it was not perhaps more desirable. Catherine,
though she did not become misanthropical, became
cynical, in spite of herself. She tolerated everything,
and smiled at it; she became indulgent and
contemptuous. What did it matter what they said
or felt? If they learned to consider her gifts as
their right, if they comforted themselves in the
humiliation of receiving by mocking at the giver,
poor things, that was their misfortune&mdash;it did not
harm her upon her serene heights. She laughed at
Hester, tapping her cheek. Had she been perhaps
less tolerant, less easy to satisfy, she would not have
excited that burning sense of shame and resentment
in the girl's heart.</p>

<p>But Catherine was very kind. She came in the
afternoon in the carriage and took them out with
her for a drive, to the admiration of all beholders.
The Miss Vernon-Ridgways inspected this from
behind their curtains, and calculated how long it<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_99" id="Page_99">[Pg 99]</a></span>
was since Catherine had shown such a civility to
themselves, and how soon Mrs. John would find out
the brief character of these attentions. And the
drive was perhaps not quite so successful as might
have been expected. Mrs. John indeed gave her
relative all the entertainment she could have
desired. She became tearful, and fell away altogether
into her pocket-handkerchief at almost every
turn of the road, saying, "Ah, how well I remember!"
then emerged from the cambric cloud,
and cheered up again till the next turn came, in a
way which would have afforded Catherine great
amusement but for the two blazing, indignant, angry
eyes of Hester fixed from the opposite side upon
her mother's foolish little pantomime and her
patroness's genial satisfaction, with equal fury, pain,
and penetration. Hester could not endure the
constant repetition of that outburst of pathos, the
smiles that would follow, the sudden relapse as her
mother was recalled by a new recollection to a sense
of what was necessary in her touching position; but
still less could she bear the lurking smile in Catherine
Vernon's eyes, and her inclination to draw the
poor lady out, sometimes even by a touch of what
Hester felt to be mock-sympathy. The girl could
scarcely contain herself as she drove along facing
these two ladies, seeing, even against her will, a
great deal which perhaps they themselves were only
half-conscious of. Oh, why would mother be so
silly! and Cousin Catherine, this rich woman who
had them all in her power, why had she not more<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_100" id="Page_100">[Pg 100]</a></span>
respect for weakness? Hester turned with an angry
longing to her idea of putting her own small young
figure between her mother and all those spurns and
scoffs, of carrying her away, and working for her,
and owing nothing to anybody.</p>

<p>When they stopped at the door of Kaley's, the
great shop of Redborough, and half-a-dozen obsequious
attendants started out to devote themselves
to the lightest suggestion of the great Miss Vernon,
Mrs. John cleared up, and enjoyed the reflected distinction
to the bottom of her heart; but Hester, pale
and furious, compelled to sit there as part of the
pageant, could scarcely keep still, and was within an
ace of jumping out of the carriage and dragging her
mother after her, so indignant was she, so humiliated.
Cousin Catherine threw a little <i>fichu</i> of black lace
into the girl's lap, with a careless, liberal, "You want
something for your neck, Hester," which the girl
would have thrown at her had she dared; and it
would not have taken much to wind her up to that
point of daring: but Mrs. John went home quite
pleased with her outing. "It was a melancholy
pleasure, to be sure," she said. "All those places
I used to know so well before you were born, Hester&mdash;and
Kaley's, where I used to spend so much
money. But, after all, it is a pleasure to come
back among the people that know you. Mr. Kaley
was so very civil; did you notice? I think he paid
more attention to me even than to Catherine; of
course he remembered that as long as I was well off
I always used to go there for everything. It was<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_101" id="Page_101">[Pg 101]</a></span>
very sad, but I am glad to have done it. And then
Catherine was so kind. Let me see that pretty lace
thing she gave you? It is exactly what you wanted.
You must be sure to put it on when we go there to-morrow
to luncheon." Hester would have liked to
tear it in pieces and throw it in Miss Vernon's face;
but her mother regarded everything from a very
different point of view.</p>

<p>Catherine Vernon, on her side, talked a great deal
to Edward that evening of the comical scene, and
how she could not get the advantage of poor Mrs.
John's little <i>minauderies</i> because of that child with
her two big eyes. "I was afraid to stir for her. I
scarcely dared to say a word. I expected every
moment to be called to give an account of myself,"
she said. It added very much to her enjoyment of
all the humours of her life that she had this companion
to tell them to. He was her confidant, and
heard everything with the tenderest interest and a
great many amusing comments of his own. Certainly
in this one particular at least her desire to be
of use to her relations had met with a rich reward.
No son was ever more attentive to his mother: and
all his habits were so <i>nice</i> and good. A young man
who gets up to botanise in the morning, who will sit
at home at night, who has no evil inclinations&mdash;how
delightful he is to the female members of his family,
and with what applause and gratitude they repay
him for his goodness! And Miss Vernon felt the
force of that additional family bond which arises
from the fact that all the interests of the household,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_102" id="Page_102">[Pg 102]</a></span>
different as their age and pursuits may be, are
the same. Nothing that concerned the one but
must have an interest for the other. Perhaps
Edward did not speak so much about himself, or
even about the business, which was naturally of the
first interest to her, as he might have done, but she
had scarcely as yet found this out: and certainly
he entered into all she told him on her side with
the most confidential fulness. "The Vernonry has
always been as good as a comedy," she said. "I
have to be so cautious not to offend them. And I
must be on my ps and qs with this little girl. There
is a great deal of fun to be got out of her; but we
must keep it strictly to ourselves."</p>

<p>"Oh, strictly!" said Edward, with a curious little
twist about the corners of his mouth. He had not
told the story of his own encounter with the new
subject of amusement, which was strange; but he
was a young man who kept his own counsel, having
his own fortune to make, as had been impressed
upon him from his birth.</p>

<p>There were only two other members of the Vernon
community with whom the strangers had not yet
made acquaintance (for as has been already said
Mrs. Reginald Vernon, the young widow who was
altogether wrapped up in her four children, and
old Captain and Mrs. Morgan on the west side of the
Vernonry scarcely counted at all), and these were
its gayest and most brilliant members, the present
dwellers in the White House, Harry and Ellen
Vernon, the most independent of all the little<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_103" id="Page_103">[Pg 103]</a></span>
community. Stories were current in it that Harry
in business matters had begun to set himself in
something like opposition to Catherine Vernon not
long after she had given up the conduct of the bank
into his hands: while Ellen detached herself openly
from her Aunt Catherine's court, and had set up a
sort of Princess of Wales's drawing-room of her own.
It was some time before they appeared at the
Vernonry, Harry driving his sister in a phaeton
with a pair of high-stepping horses which seemed
scarcely to touch the ground. The whole population
of the place was stirred by the appearance of this
brilliant equipage. Mrs. Reginald Vernon's little
boy, though bound under solemn penalties never
to enter the gardens, came round and hung upon
the gate to gaze. Even old Captain Morgan rose
from his window to take another look. Mr. Mildmay
Vernon came out with his newspaper in his hand,
and if the sisters did not appear, it was not from
want of curiosity but because Ellen Vernon had
not received their civilities when she came to
Redborough with the cordiality they had a right to
expect. Catherine Vernon's fine sleek horses made
no such impression as did this dashing pair. And
the pair who descended from the phaeton were as
dashing as their steeds. Ellen was very fair, with
hair half flaxen half golden, in light little curls like
a baby's upon her forehead, which was not the
fashion in those days and therefore much more
effective. She was dressed in a rich red-purple
gown, charitably supposed to be "second mourning"<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_104" id="Page_104">[Pg 104]</a></span>
by the addition of a little lace and a black ribbon,
with yards of silken train sweeping after her, and
sweeping up too all the mats at the doors as she
went in. Harry was in the lightest of light clothes,
but he had a tiny hat-band supposed to answer all
necessities in the way of "respect" to John Vernon
deceased, or to John's widow living. Hester standing
shyly by, thought this new cousin Ellen the most
beautiful creature she had ever seen; her daintiness
and her fineness, her airy fairness of face, set off by
the rich colour of her dress, was dazzling as she
came into the brown room, with its two inhabitants
in mourning, and the tall, light-coloured young man
after her. Mrs. John made them her little curtsey,
shook hands with them, gave her greeting and a smile
or two, and then had recourse to her handkerchief.</p>

<p>"Oh yes, thanks," she said, "I have quite settled
down. I am very comfortable, but everything is so
changed. To go away from the White House where
I had everything I wished for, and then to come
back&mdash;here; it is a great difference."</p>

<p>"Oh, but this is so much nicer than the White
House," cried Ellen; "this is so delightfully old
fashioned! I would give the world to have the
Vernonry. If Aunt Catherine had only given it to
us when we came here and taken the White House
for the&mdash;&mdash;" pensioners she was about to say, but
paused in time&mdash;"other relations! I should have
liked it so much better, and probably so would
you."</p>

<p>Mrs. John shook her head.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_105" id="Page_105">[Pg 105]</a></span></p>

<p>"I never could have gone back to it in the same
circumstances," she said, "and therefore I would
prefer not to go to it at all."</p>

<p>"But oh, you must come and see me!" said
Ellen; "and you too," turning to Hester. "I am
so fond of getting among little girls and feeling
myself quite young again. Come and spend a long
day with me, won't you? I will show you all my
things, and Harry shall drive us out, if you like
driving. May she come? We have always something
going on. Aunt Catherine's is the old set,
and ours is the young set," she said with a laugh.
She spoke with a little accompaniment of chains
and bracelets, a soft jingle as of harness, about her,
being very lively and full of little gestures&mdash;pretty
bridlings of her head and movements of her hands.</p>

<p>Harry behind backed her up, as seemed to be
his duty.</p>

<p>"She is dreadfully wild," he said; "she would
like to be always on the go."</p>

<p>"Oh, Harry, nothing of the sort; but if we don't
enjoy ourselves when we are young, when are we to
do it? And then I say it is good policy, don't you
think so, Mrs. Vernon? You see we are just like
shopkeepers, all the people hereabouts are our
customers. And Aunt Catherine gives big dinners
for the old fogeys, but we do just as much good,
keeping the young ones jolly; and we keep ourselves
jolly too."</p>

<p>"Indeed, Miss Ellen," said Mrs. John, with some
dignity, "I never heard such an idea that bankers<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_106" id="Page_106">[Pg 106]</a></span>
were like shopkeepers. Catherine must have made
great changes indeed if it is like that. It never was
so in my time."</p>

<p>"Oh," said Ellen, "you were too grand to allow it,
that is all, but it is the fashion now to speak plain."
And she laughed, and Harry laughed as if it had
been the best joke in the world. "But we mustn't
say so before Aunt Catherine," cried the gay young
woman. "She disapproves of us both as it is.
Perhaps not so much of Harry, for she likes the
boys best, you know; but oh, dreadfully of me!
If you want to keep in favour with Aunt Catherine&mdash;isn't
your name Hester?"</p>

<p>"I don't," said Hester, abruptly, without further
question.</p>

<p>"Oh, Harry, look here, here's another rebel! isn't
it fun? I thought you were nice from the very first
look of you," and here Ellen rose with a still greater
jingle of all her trappings and touched with her
own delicate fair cheek the darker oval of Hester's,
which coloured high with shyness and pleasure.
"I'll tell you what I'll do, I'll come for you one of
these days. Are you doing lessons now? What
are you learning? Oh, she may have a holiday for
one day?"</p>

<p>"That is just what I ought to be inquiring about,"
said Mrs. John. "A governess&mdash;I am afraid I am
not able to carry her on myself. I have taught
her," the poor lady said with pride, "all she
knows."</p>

<p>Hester listened with a gasp of astonishment.<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_107" id="Page_107">[Pg 107]</a></span>
What Mrs. John meant was all she knew herself,
which was not much. And how about her teaching
and her independence and the <i>cours</i> she felt herself
ready to open? She was obliged to overcome her
shyness and explain herself.</p>

<p>"I don't want to learn," she said, "I want to
teach. I can speak French, and Italian, and German.
I want to open a <i>cours</i>; don't you think I might
open a <i>cours</i>? I know that I could teach, for I am
so fond of it, and I want something to do." Having
got all this out like a sudden shot from a gun,
Hester stopped short, got behind her mother, and
was heard no more.</p>

<p>"Oh!" cried Ellen, "teach! that little thing!"
and then she turned to her brother, "Isn't it fine?"
she said; "it would be a shame to stop her when
she wishes it. French and Italian and German,
only fancy. I don't know what a <i>cours</i> is, but
whatever it is you shall have it, dear. I promise
you. Certainly you shall have it. I will not have
you kept back for the want of that."</p>

<p>Hester was a great deal too much excited to laugh,
and here Mrs. John interfered. "You must excuse
me," she said, nervously. "Do not think I don't
feel the kindness. Oh, you must excuse me! I
could not let her teach. My poor husband would
never have suffered it for a moment. And what
would Catherine say?&mdash;a Vernon! Oh, no, no! it
is impossible; there is nothing I would not rather
do. She has spoken of it before: but I thought it
only childish nonsense. Oh, no, no! thank Heaven,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_108" id="Page_108">[Pg 108]</a></span>
though we are poor," cried the poor lady, "and
fallen from what we were&mdash;we are not fallen so
far as that."</p>

<p>"Oh, but it isn't falling at all," said Ellen; "you
see you are old-fashioned. Don't be angry. I don't
mean any harm. But don't you know it is the
fashion now for girls to do something? Oh, but
it is though! the best girls do it; they paint, and
they do needlework, and they sing, and they write
little books, and everybody is proud to be able to
earn money. It is only when they are clever that
they can teach; and then they are so proud! Oh,
I assure you, Mrs. Vernon! I would not say so if it
were not quite the right thing. You know, Harry,
people do it in town constantly. Lady Mannion's
daughter mends old lace, and Mrs. Markham paints
things for the shops. It is the fashion; the very
best families do it. It will be quite aristocratic to
have a Vernon teaching. I shall take lessons myself."</p>

<p>"That's the thing," said the good-natured Harry.
"Nell, that's the best thing. She shall teach you
and me."</p>

<p>"Oh, he wants to make a hole-and-corner thing of
it," said Ellen, "to hide it up! How silly boys are!
when it is the very height of the fashion and will
bring us into notice directly! There is old Lady
Freeling will take her up at once: and the Duchess.
You may do whatever you please, but I will stand
by her. You may count upon me, Hester, I will
stand by you through thick and thin. You will be
quite a heroine: everybody will take you up."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_109" id="Page_109">[Pg 109]</a></span></p>

<p>Mrs. John looked from one to the other aghast.
"Oh, no, no, pardon me; but Hester&mdash;I cannot
sanction it, I cannot sanction it; your poor papa&mdash;"
faltered Mrs. John.</p>

<p>It was characteristic that in the very midst of this
discussion Ellen Vernon got up with all the ringing
of her caparison, and took her leave, declaring that
she had forgotten that she had to go somewhere at
four o'clock, "and you know the horses will not
stand, Harry," she said, "but whenever we are happy
anywhere, we forget all our engagements&mdash;we are
two such sillies, Harry and I." She put her arm
round Hester's waist as they went through the
passage, and kissed her again at the door. "Mind,
you are to come and spend a long, long day with
me," she said. Mrs. John interrupted in the midst
of her remonstrances, and not sure that this dazzling
creature would not drive off straight somewhere or
other to establish Hester in her <i>cours</i>, followed after
them trying to put in another word. But Ellen had
been placed in her seat, and her dust-cloak arranged
round her, before the poor lady could say anything.
And she too stood spell-bound like all the rest, to
see the beautiful young couple in their grandeur, so
fair, so handsome, so perfectly got up. The only
fault that their severest critic could find with them
was that they were too fair; their very eyelashes
were flaxen, there were no contrasts in their smooth
fair faces; but this in conjunction with so much
youth and daintiness had a charm of its own. Mr.
Mildmay Vernon had been watching for them at the<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_110" id="Page_110">[Pg 110]</a></span>
window, losing all the good of his book, which was
from the circulating library and cost twopence a
night; consequently he threw away at least the half
of a farthing waiting for the young people to come
out. When they appeared again he went to his
door, taking off the soft old felt hat which he wore
habitually out of doors and in, and kissing his hand&mdash;not
it is to be feared very much to his advantage,
for these two fine young folks paid little attention to
their poor relations. The Miss Vernon-Ridgways
looked out behind their curtains watching closely.
How fine it is to be young and rich and beautiful
and on the top of the wave! With what admiration
all your dependents look upon you. Every one in
the Vernonry was breathless with excitement when
Harry took the reins and the groom left the horses'
heads, and the phaeton wheeled round. The little
boys at the gate scattered as it wheeled out, the
small Vernons vindicating their gentility and relationship
by standing straight in the way of the
horses. And with what a whirl and dash they
turned round the sweep of the road, and disappeared
from the longing view! Mildmay Vernon
who had taken such trouble to get a glance from
them crossed over to the door of the verandah where
Mrs. John, with the streamers of her cap blowing
about her, and her mind as much disturbed as her
capstrings, stood still breathless watching the departure.
"Well," he said, "so you've had the Prince
and Princess in all their grandeur." Mrs. John had
to take a moment to collect herself before she could<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_111" id="Page_111">[Pg 111]</a></span>
even make out what he had said. As for Hester,
she was so dazzled by this visit, her head and her
heart so beating and throbbing, that she was incapable
of putting up with the conversation which
always made her wicked. She ran away, leaving her
mother at the door, and flew to her own room to
recollect all that had passed, and to go over it again
and again as lovers do. She put her hands over her
eyes and lived over again that moment, and every
detail of Cousin Ellen's appearance and every word
she had said. The jingle of her chains and trinkets
seemed to Hester like silver bells, a pretty individualism
and sign of her presence. If she went
into a dark room or if you were blind, Hester
thought, you would know by that that it was she.
And the regal colour of her dress, and the black
lace of her bonnet all puffed about those wonderful
light locks, and her dainty shoes and her delicate
gloves, and everything about her! "A long, long
day," and "You may count upon me, Hester." Was
it possible that a creature so dazzling, so triumphant,
had spoken such words to her? Her heart was
more elated than it had ever been before in her
life. And as for the work which she had made up
her mind to do, for the first time it seemed possible
and feasible. Cousin Ellen would arrange it for her.
She was far too much excited and awed to be able
to laugh at the mistake Cousin Ellen had made in
her haste about buying a <i>cours</i> for Hester, not
knowing in the least what it meant. In this
way with all sincerity the dazzled worshippers of<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_112" id="Page_112">[Pg 112]</a></span>
greatness lose their perception of the ridiculous in
the persons of those who have seized upon their imaginations.
Hester would have been revolted and
angered had any one noted this ludicrous particular
in the conversation. Through the open window the
girl heard the voices of her mother and the neighbours,
now including the sharp voice of Miss Vernon-Ridgway,
and the sound made her heart rise with a
kind of indignant fury. They would discuss her as
if they had any understanding of such a creature, as
if they knew what they were speaking about! they,
old, poor, spiteful as they were, and she so beautiful,
so young, so splendid, and so kind. "The kindness
was the chief thing," Hester said to herself, putting
her fingers in her ears not to hear the ill-nature
down stairs. Oh, of course, they would be taking
her to pieces, pouring their gall upon her! Hester
felt that youth and happiness were on her own side
as against the envious and old and poor.</p>

<p>For days after she looked in vain for the reappearance
of that heavenly vision, every morning getting
up with the conviction that by noon at least it would
appear, every afternoon making up her mind that
the dulness of the lingering hours would be brightened
by the sound, the flash, the wind of rapid
movement, the same delightful voice, the perfumed
fair cheek, the jingle of the golden caparisons.
Every day Mrs. John said, first cheerfully, then
querulously, "I wonder if they will come for you to-day."
When it began to dawn upon Hester at last
that they were not coming, the sense of deception<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_113" id="Page_113">[Pg 113]</a></span>
which came over her was, in some sort, like the
pangs of death. She stood still, in her very being
astounded, unable to understand what had happened.
They <i>were not coming again</i>. Her very heart stood
still, and all the wheels of her existence in a blank
pause like death. When they began to move again
reluctantly, hoarsely, Hester felt too sick and faint
for any conscious comment upon what had happened.
She could not bear the commentary which she was
almost forced to hear, and which she thought would
kill her&mdash;the "Poor child! so you've been expecting
Ellen Vernon?" which Miss Matilda next door said
to her with an insulting laugh, almost drove her
frantic. And not much less aggravating to the sensitive
girl were her mother's frequent wonderings
what could have become of them, whether Ellen could
be ill, what had happened. "They said they would
come and fetch you to spend a day with them,
didn't they? Then why don't they come, Hester?&mdash;why
don't they come?" the poor lady said.
Hester's anger and wretchedness and nervous irritation
were such that she could almost have struck
her mother. Was it right, in addition to her own
disappointment, that she should have this question
thrust upon her, and that all the pangs of
her first disenchantment should be discussed by contemptuous
spectators? This terrible experience,
which seemed to Hester to be branded upon her as
by red-hot irons, made a woman of her all at once.
To her own consciousness, at least, she was a child
no more.</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_114" id="Page_114">[Pg 114]</a></span></p>




<h2><a name="CHAPTER_VIII" id="CHAPTER_VIII">CHAPTER VIII.</a></h2>

<h3>NINETEEN.</h3>


<p>Such were the scenes and the people among whom
Hester Vernon grew up. Her first <i>d&eacute;sillusionment</i>
in respect to Cousin Ellen, who for one bright and
brief moment seemed about to bring glory to her
young existence, was very poignant and bitter: but
by the time Hester was nineteen she had ceased to
remember that there had been so sharp a sting in
it, and no longer felt it possible that Ellen, with all
her finery, could at any moment have affected her
with any particular sentiment. These years made a
great deal of difference in Hester. She was at the
same time younger and older at nineteen than at
fourteen. She was less self-confident, less sure of
her own powers to conduct everything, from her
mother&mdash;the most easily guided of all subject intelligences
in the old days&mdash;upwards to all human
circumstances, and even to life itself, which it had
seemed perfectly simple to the girl that she should
shape at her own pleasure. By degrees, as she grew
older, she found the futility of all these certainties.<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_115" id="Page_115">[Pg 115]</a></span>
Her mother, who was so easily guided, slid back
again just as easily out of the groove into which her
child had, as she thought, fixed her, and circumstances
defied her altogether, taking their own way,
altogether uninfluenced by her wishes. Mrs. John
Vernon was like the "knotless thread" of the
Scotch proverb. Nothing could be more easy than
to convince her, to impress her ductile mind with
the sense of this or that duty; but, on the other
hand, nothing could be more easy than to undo
next moment all that had been done, and turn the
facile will in a new direction. Between this soft
and yielding foundation of her life upon which she
could find no firm footing, and the rock of Catherine
Vernon who remained quite immovable and uninfluenced
by her, coming no nearer as the years went
on, yet hemming in her steps and lessening her
freedom, the conditions of existence seemed all
against the high-spirited, ambitious, active-minded
and impatient girl, with her warm affections, and
quick intelligence, and hasty disposition. The people
immediately about were calculated to make her
despise her fellow-creatures altogether: the discontented
dependents who received everything without
a touch of human feeling, without gratitude or kindness,
and the always half-contemptuous patroness
who gave with not much more virtue, with a disdainful
magnanimity, asking nothing from her pensioners
but that they would amuse her with their follies&mdash;made
up a circle such as might have crushed the
goodness out of any young mind. Even had she<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_116" id="Page_116">[Pg 116]</a></span>
herself begun with any enthusiasm for Catherine,
the situation would have been less terrible; but as
this, unfortunately, had not been the case, the poor
girl was delivered over to the contemplation of one
of the worst problems in human nature without
shield or safeguard, or any refuge to creep into.
Fortunately her youth, and the familiarity which
deadens all impression, kept her, as it keeps men in
general, from a conscious and naked encounter with
those facts which are fatal to all higher views or
natural charities. She had in her, however, by
nature only too strong a tendency to despise her
neighbours, and the Miss Vernon-Ridgways and Mr.
Mildmay Vernon were exactly of the order of beings
which a young adventurer upon life naturally treats
with disdain.</p>

<p>But Hester had something worse in her life than
even this feeling of contempt for the people about
her, bad as that is. She had the additional pang of
knowing that habit and temper often made her a
partaker of the odious sentiments which she loathed.
Sometimes she would be drawn into the talk of the
women who misrepresented their dear Catherine all
day long, and sneered bitterly at the very bounty
that supplied their wants. Sometimes she would
join involuntarily in the worse malignity of the man
to whom Catherine Vernon gave everything that was
good in his life, and who attributed every bad motive
to her. And as if that was not enough, Hester
sinned with Catherine too, and saw the ridicule
and the meanness of these miserable pensioners with<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_117" id="Page_117">[Pg 117]</a></span>
a touch of the same cynicism which was the elder
woman's great defect, but was unpardonable in the
younger, to whom there should as yet have been no
loss of the ideal. The rage with which she would
contemplate herself when she yielded to the first
temptation and launched at Cousin Catherine in a
moment of passion one of those arrows which were
manufactured in the Vernonry, the deep disgust
which would fill her when she felt herself, like
Catherine, contemplating the world from a pinnacle
of irony, chill but smiling, swept her young spirit
like tempests. To grow at all in the midst of such
gales and whirlwinds was something. It was not
to be expected that she could grow otherwise than
contorted with the blasts. She came to the flower
and bloom of existence with a heart made to believe
and trust, yet warped to almost all around, and
finding no spot of honest standing-ground on which
to trust herself. Sometimes the young creature
would raise her head dismayed from one of the books
in which life is so different from what she found it,
and ask herself whether books were all lies, or whether
there was not to be found somewhere an existence
which was true? Sometimes she would stop short
in the midst of the Church services, or when she
said her prayers, to demand whether it was all
false, and these things invented only to make life
bearable? Was it worth living? she would ask
sometimes, with more reason than the essayists.
She could do nothing she wanted in it. Her <i>cours</i>
had all melted into thin air; if it had been possible<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_118" id="Page_118">[Pg 118]</a></span>
to get the consent of her authorities to the work
she had once felt herself so capable of, she was now
capable of it no longer. Her mother, obstinate in
nothing else, had been obstinate in this, that her
poor husband's daughter should not dishonour his
name (alack the day!) by becoming a teacher&mdash;a
teacher! like the poor governesses for whom he had
felt so much contempt; and Catherine Vernon, the
last auxiliary whom Mrs. John expected, had supported
her with a decision which put all struggles
out of the question. Catherine indeed had explained
herself on the occasion with a force which had almost
brought her within the range of Hester's sympathies,
notwithstanding that the decision was against herself.
"I am here," Miss Vernon had said, "to take care
of our family. The bank, and the money it brings
in, are not for me alone. I am ready to supply all
that is wanted, as reason directs, and I cannot give
my sanction to any members of the family descending
out of the position in which, by the hard work of
our forefathers, they were born. Women have never
worked for their living in our family, and, so far
as I can help it, they never shall."</p>

<p>"You did yourself, Cousin Catherine," said Hester,
who stood forth to learn her fate, looking up with
those large eyes, eager and penetrating, of which
Miss Vernon still stood in a certain awe.</p>

<p>"That was different. I did not stoop down to
paltry work. I took a place which&mdash;others had
abandoned. I was wanted to save the family, and
thank Heaven I could do it. For that, if you were<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_119" id="Page_119">[Pg 119]</a></span>
up to it, and occasion required, you should have
my permission to do anything. Keep the books, or
sweep the floors, what would it matter!"</p>

<p>"It would matter nothing to me," cried Hester,
clasping her nervous hands together; and then it
was that for a moment these two, the old woman
and the young woman, made of the same metal, with
the same defects and virtues, looked each other in
the eyes, and almost understood each other.</p>

<p>Almost, but, alas! not quite: Catherine's prejudices
against Mrs. John's daughter, and her adverse
experiences of mankind and womankind, especially
among the Vernons, intervened, and brought her
down suddenly from that high and serious ground
upon which Hester had been capable of understanding
her. She turned away with one of those
laughs, which still brought over the girl, in her
sensitive youthfulness, a blush which was like a
blaze of angry shame.</p>

<p>"No chance, I hope, of needing that a second
time: nor of turning for succour to you, my poor
girl."</p>

<p>It was not unkindly said, especially the latter part
of the sentence, though it ended in another laugh.
But Hester, who did not know the circumstances,
was quite unaware what that laugh meant. She did
not know that it was not only Catherine Vernon's
personal force and genius, but Catherine Vernon's
money, which had saved the bank. In the latter
point of view, of course, no succour could have been
had from Hester; and it was the impossibility of this<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_120" id="Page_120">[Pg 120]</a></span>
which made Miss Vernon laugh. But Hester thought
it was her readiness, her devotion, her power of doing
everything that mortal woman had ever done before
her, which was doubted, and the sense that she was
neither believed in nor understood swept in a wave
of bitterness through her heart. She was taken for
a mere schoolgirl, well-meaning perhaps&mdash;perhaps
not even that: incapable&mdash;she who felt herself
running over with capacity and strength, running to
waste. But she said nothing more. She retired,
carried further away from Catherine in the recoil,
from the manner of the approach to comprehending
her which she felt she had made. And after that
arrest of all her plans, Hester had ceased to struggle.
In a little while she was no longer capable of the
<i>cours</i> to which she had looked so eagerly. She did
not know anything else that she could do. She was
obliged to eat the bread of dependence, feeling
herself like all the rest, to the very heart ungrateful,
turning against the hand that bestowed it. There
was a little of Mrs. John's income left, enough,
Hester thought, to live upon in another place, where
she might have been free to eke out this little.
But at nineteen she was wiser than at fourteen, and
knew that to risk her mother's comfort, or to throw
the element of uncertainty again into her life, would
be at once unpardonable and impossible. She had
to yield, as most women have to do. She had to
consent to be bound by other people's rules, and to
put her hand to nothing that was unbecoming a
Vernon, a member of the reigning family. Small<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_121" id="Page_121">[Pg 121]</a></span>
earnings by means of sketches, or china painting,
would have been as obnoxious to Catherine Vernon's
rule as the <i>cours</i>: and of what use would they have
been? It was not a little money that Hester wanted,
but work of which something good might come.
She yielded altogether, proudly, without another
word. The arrangement of the little household, the
needlework, and the housekeeping, were nothing
to her young capabilities; but she desisted from
the attempt to make something better of herself,
with an indignant yet sorrowful pride. Sometime
Catherine might find out what it was she had
rejected. This was the forlorn and bitter hope in
her heart.</p>

<p>The only element of comfort which Hester found
at this dark period of her life was in the other side
of the Heronry in the two despised households,
which the Miss Vernon-Ridgways and Mr. Mildmay
Vernon declared to be "not of our class." Mr.
Reginald Vernon's boys were always in mischief;
and Hester, who had something of the boy in her,
took to them with genuine fellow-feeling, and after
a while began to help them in their lessons (though
she knew nothing herself) with great effect. She
knew nothing herself; but a clear head, even without
much information, will easily make a path
through the middle of a schoolboy's lessons, which,
notwithstanding his Latin, he could not have found
out for himself. And Hester was "a dab at figures,"
the boys said, and found out their sums in a way
which was little short of miraculous. And there<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_122" id="Page_122">[Pg 122]</a></span>
was a little sister who called forth all the tender
parts of Hester's nature, who had been a baby on
her first appearance at the Vernonry, and to whom
the girl would gladly have made herself nurse and
governess, and everything that girl could be. Little
Katie was as fond of Hester as of her mother, and
this was a wonderful solace to the heart of the girl,
who was a woman every inch of her, though she was
so much of a boy. Altogether the atmosphere was
better on that side of the establishment, the windows
looked on the Common, and the air was fresh and
large. And Mrs. Reginald, if she would have cared
for it, which was doubtful, had no time for gossip.
She did not pretend to be fond of Catherine, but she
was respectful and grateful, a new feeling altogether
to Hester. She was busy all day long, always
doing something, making clothes, mending stockings,
responding to all the thousand appeals of a set of
healthy, noisy children. The house was not so
orderly as it might be, and its aspect very different
from that of the refined gentility on the other side;
but the atmosphere was better, though sometimes
there was a flavour of boots in it, and in the afternoon
of tea. It was considered "just like the girl,"
that she should thus take to Mrs. Reginald, who had
been a poor clergyman's daughter, and was a Vernon
only by marriage. It showed what kind of stuff she
was made of.</p>

<p>"You should not let her spend her time there&mdash;a
mere nursery-maid of a woman. To think that
your daughter should have such tastes! But you<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_123" id="Page_123">[Pg 123]</a></span>
should not let her, dear Mrs. John," the sisters
said.</p>

<p>"<i>I</i> let her!" cried Mrs. John, throwing up her
hands; "I would not for the world say a word
against my own child, but Hester is more than I can
pretend to manage. She always was more than I
could manage. Her poor papa was the only one
that could do anything with her."</p>

<p>It was hard upon the girl when her own mother
gave her up; but this too was in Hester's day's
work; and she learned to smile at it, a little disdainfully,
as Catherine Vernon did; though she was
so little hardened in this way that her lips would
quiver in the middle of her smile.</p>

<p>The chief resource which Hester found on the
other side of the Vernonry was, however, still more
objectionable to the feelings of the genteel portion
of the little community, since it was in the other
little house that she found it, in the society of the
old people who were not Vernons at all, but who
quite unjustifiably as they all felt, being only her
mother's relations, were kept there by Catherine
Vernon, on the money of the family, the money
which was hers only in trust for the benefit of her
relations. They grudged Captain Morgan his home,
they grudged him his peaceful looks, they grudged
him the visits which Catherine was supposed to pay
oftener to him than to any one else in the Vernonry.
It is true that the Miss Vernon-Ridgways professed
to find Catherine's visits anything but desirable.</p>

<p>"Dear Catherine!" they said, "what a pity she<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_124" id="Page_124">[Pg 124]</a></span>
has so little manner! When she is absent one can
recollect all her good qualities, how kind she really
is, you know, at bottom, and what a thing it is for
her to have us here, and how lonely she would be,
with her ways, if she had not us to fall back upon.
But when she is present, really you know it is a
struggle! Her manner is so against the poor, dear!
One is glad to see her go, to think, <i>that</i> is over; it
will be some time before she can come again; for
she really is much better, <i>far</i> better, than she
appears, poor dear Catherine!"</p>

<p>This was how they spoke of her: while Mr. Mildmay
shrugged his thin old shoulders. "Catherine,
poor thing, has too much the air of coming to see
if our houses are clean and our dinners simple
enough," he said.</p>

<p>Even Mrs. John chimed in to the general chorus,
though in her heart she was glad to see Catherine,
or any one. But they were all annoyed that she
should go so often to those old Morgans. They kept
an account of her calls, though they made believe
to dislike them, and when the carriage was heard on
the road (they could all distinguish the sound it
made from that of any other carriage), they all
calculated eagerly at what house she was due next.
And when, instead of coming in at the open gate,
which the old gardener made haste to open for her,
as if he had known her secrets and was aware of
her coming, she stayed outside, and drew up at the
Morgans, nobody could imagine what a commotion
there was. The sisters rushed in at once to Mrs.<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_125" id="Page_125">[Pg 125]</a></span>
John, who had a window round the corner, and
watched to see if it was really true, and how long
Catherine stayed. They made remarks on the little
old gentleman, with his white head, when he came
out to put her into the carriage.</p>

<p>"What hypocrites some people are," they cried.
"We are always as civil as ever we can be, and I
hope dear Catherine, poor thing, <i>always</i> feels that
she is welcome. But to make believe that we have
enjoyed it is more than Martha or I am equal to."
They watched until the fat horses had turned round
and Catherine's bonnet was no longer distinguishable.
"That is the third time in a month, to my
certain knowledge," Miss Matilda would say.</p>

<p>"Be thankful, my dear ladies, that it is on old
Morgan, not on you, that she bestows her favours,"
Mr. Mildmay would remark.</p>

<p>Mrs. John was not always sure that she liked this
irruption into her house. But she too watched with
a little pique, and said that Catherine had a strange
taste.</p>

<p>"Oh, taste; dear Catherine! she has no <i>taste</i>!
Her worst enemy never accused of her <i>that</i>," the
other ladies cried.</p>

<p>And when it was known that these old Morgans,
the captain and his wife whom Catherine Vernon
distinguished in this way, had gained the heart of
Hester, the excitement in the Vernonry was tremendous.
Mr. Mildmay Vernon, though he was generally
very polite to her, turned upon his heel, when the
fact was made known to him, with angry contempt.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_126" id="Page_126">[Pg 126]</a></span></p>

<p>"I draw the line at the Morgans," he said. Much
might be forgiven to the young girl, the only youthful
creature (except Mrs. Reginald's boys, whom he
detested) among them, but not this.</p>

<p>The sisters did not, alas, pass it over so briefly.
They themselves had never taken any notice of the
old couple. The utmost they had done had been
to give the old captain a nod, as they did to the
tradesmen, when he took off his hat to them.
Mrs. Morgan, who never went out, did not come
in their way, fortunately for her. So strange was
this departure on Hester's part from all the traditions
of the place that, to do them justice, they
would not believe in her iniquity until the fullest
proof had been secured. But after she had been
seen about half a dozen times, at least, seated in the
round window which commanded the road, and was
the old gentleman's delight, and even, strange girl,
without any sense of shame, had made herself
visible to everybody walking with him on the edge
of the Common, and standing talking to him at his
door, there was no further possibility of doubt on
the subject. The only thing that could be thought
was to cut Hester, which was done accordingly by
all the garden front, even her own mother being
wound up by much exhortation, as for the advantage
of her daughter's soul, to maintain a studied
silence to the culprit by way of bringing her to her
senses. But it may be supposed that Mrs. John
did not hold out long. A more effectual means of
punishment than this was invented by Mr. Mildmay<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_127" id="Page_127">[Pg 127]</a></span>
Vernon, who declared that it was a very clever way
of currying favour with Catherine, and that he only
wondered it had never been adopted before. This,
indeed, touched Hester to the quick: but it did not
detach her from her friends. The objects of all this
enmity were two very simple old people without any
pretension at all, who were very willing to live peaceably
with all men. Captain Morgan was an old
sea-captain, with all the simplicity of homely wisdom
which so often characterises his class; and his wife
a gentle old woman, entirely devoted to him, and,
by this time, not capable of much more than to
keep the record of all his distinctions and to assert
his goodness. It was he who helped her down
stairs every day to the chimney corner in winter,
and in summer to the large chair in the window,
from which she could see everything that went on
in the road, all the people that passed, and the few
events that happened. A conviction that little Ted,
Mrs. Reginald's third boy, would be run over, and
an alarmed watch for that incident, were the only
things that disturbed her placid existence: and
that she could not accompany him on his walks was
her only regret.</p>

<p>"He dearly loves somebody to walk with," she
said: "except when he was at sea, my dear, I've
gone everywhere with him: and he misses me sadly.
Take a little turn with the captain, my dear."</p>

<p>And when Hester did that which so horrified the
other neighbours, old Mrs. Morgan looked out after
them from the window and saw the tall slim girl<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_128" id="Page_128">[Pg 128]</a></span>
walking by the side of the stooping old man, with
a pure delight that brought the tears to her eyes.
When you are over eighty it does not take much to
make you cry. Hester, who was the subject of continual
assault in every other place, was adored and
applauded in this little parlour, where they thought
her more beautiful, and good, and clever, than ever
girl had been before. The old captain, who was
screwed and twisted with rheumatism, and stooped
with age, held himself almost straight when his young
companion started with him upon his daily walk.</p>

<p>"When a young lady goes with me," he said, "I
must remember my manners. An old fellow gets
careless when he's left to himself."</p>

<p>And he told Hester stories of all the many-chaptered
past, of the long historic distances, which he could
remember like yesterday, and which seemed endless,
like an eternity, to her wondering eyes. He had
been in some of the old sea-fights of the heroic days&mdash;at
Trafalgar, though not in Nelson's ship; and he
liked nothing better than to fight his battles over
again. But it was not these warlike recollections
so much as the scraps of his more peaceful experience
which entranced the young listener. She liked
to hear him tell how he had "got hold" of a foolish
young middy or an able seaman who was "going to
the bad," or how he had subdued a threatening
mutiny, and calmed an excitement; and of the
many, many who had fallen around him, while he
kept on&mdash;fallen in death sometimes, fallen more
sadly in other ways. A whole world seemed to<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_129" id="Page_129">[Pg 129]</a></span>
open round Hester as he talked&mdash;a world more
serious, more large, than this, in which there were
only the paltry events of the day and her foolish
little troubles. In Captain Morgan's world there
were great storms and fights; there were dangers
and struggles, and death lurking round every corner.
She used to listen breathless, wondering at the difference&mdash;for
what danger was there, what chance of
mortal peril or temptation, here? In that other
universe the lives of hundreds of people would sometimes
hang upon the decision and promptitude, the
cool head and ready resource of one. Why was not
Hester born in that day? Why was not she a man?
But she did not sufficiently realise that when the
men were going through these perils, the mothers
and sisters were trembling at home, able to do no
more than she could. After these walks and talks,
she would go in with the captain to pour out his
tea, while Mrs. Morgan, in her big chair, restrained
herself and would not cry for pleasure as she was
so fain to do.</p>

<p>"Oh, my dear, it was a good wind that blew you
here," the old lady said. "The trouble it has been
to me not to be able to go about with him! Indoors
we are the best companions still; but he always
liked his walk, and it is dreadful not to be able to
go out with him. But he is happy when he has a
young companion like you."</p>

<p>Thus they made a princess of Hester, and attributed
to her every beautiful quality under the sun.
When a girl is not used to enthusiasm at home, it<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_130" id="Page_130">[Pg 130]</a></span>
does her good to have somebody believe in her and
admire all she is doing. And this was what made
her strong to bear all the jibes of the fine people, and
even that detestable suggestion that she meant to
curry favour with Catherine. Even the sting of this
did not move her to give up her old captain and her
humbler friends.</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_131" id="Page_131">[Pg 131]</a></span></p>




<h2><a name="CHAPTER_IX" id="CHAPTER_IX">CHAPTER IX.</a></h2>

<h3>RECOLLECTIONS.</h3>


<p>"If you will not think me an old croaker, ma'am,
I would say that you retired from work too soon.
That was always my opinion. I said it at the time,
and I say it again. To give up before your time is
flying in the face of Providence."</p>

<p>"I know you are fond of a fine preacher, Mr.
Rule," said Catherine Vernon; "don't you remember
what the Scotch Chalmers said, that our lives were
like the work of creation, and that the last ten years
was the Sabbath&mdash;for rest?"</p>

<p>"We are not under the Jewish dispensation," said
the old clerk, as if that settled the question.</p>

<p>Catherine laughed. She was seated near old Mrs.
Morgan in the round window, her carriage waiting
outside. Mr. Rule, who was a neighbour, having
retired upon a handsome pension and occupying
a handsome house, had come in to call upon the old
couple, and these two, so long associated in labour
and anxiety, had begun, as was natural, to talk on<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_132" id="Page_132">[Pg 132]</a></span>
a subject which the others with difficulty followed&mdash;the
bank. Mrs. Morgan never did anything save sit
contentedly in her chair with her hands clasped, but
the captain sat by the table working away at one
of his models of ships. He was very fond of making
these small craft, which were admirably rigged and
built like miniature men-of-war. This one was for
Alick Vernon, the middle boy of Mrs. Reginald's
three. In the background, half hidden by the curtains
and by the captain's seat, Hester had taken
refuge in a deep elbow-chair, and was reading. She
did not want to hide herself, but she had no desire
to be seen, and kept in the background of her own
will. Catherine Vernon never took any special
notice of her, and Hester was too proud either to
show that she felt this, or to make any attempt to
mend matters. She had risen up on her cousin's
entrance, and touched her hand coldly, then sank
back into her former place, and whether any one
remembered that she was there at all she did not
know.</p>

<p>"If one works till sixty, one does very well," Miss
Vernon said.</p>

<p>"You did not think that applicable to me, ma'am,"
said the clerk. "You would not let me give up
till I was near seventy."</p>

<p>"For the sake of the bank&mdash;for the sake of the
young men. Where would they have been without
a guide?"</p>

<p>"Ah!" said old Rule, shaking his head, "there is
no guide like the chief. They might turn upon<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_133" id="Page_133">[Pg 133]</a></span>
me, and laugh in my face, and tell me I am old-fashioned;
but they could not say that to you."</p>

<p>"Well, well! the young men fortunately have
gone on very well, and have shown no need of a
guide."</p>

<p>To this there was no reply, but a little pause
pregnant of meaning. The thrill of the significance
in it roused Hester altogether from her book: she
had not been reading much to begin with, and now
all her faculties were awakened. She understood no
reason for it, but she understood <i>it</i>. Not so Catherine,
however, who took no notice, as so often
happens to the person chiefly concerned.</p>

<p>"Thirty years is a long spell," she said. "I was
at it late and early, and did not do so badly, though
I am only a woman."</p>

<p>"Women&mdash;when they do take to business&mdash;are
sometimes better then men," said the clerk, with an
accent almost of awe.</p>

<p>"That is natural," said old Captain Morgan over
his boat, without raising his head. "For why?&mdash;it
is not the common women, but those of the noble
kind, that ever think of trying: so of course they go
further and do better than the common men."</p>

<p>"I don't think that is a compliment," said Catherine,
"though it sounds a little like one. You have
a turn for those sort of sayings, Uncle Morgan, which
seem very sweet, but have a bitter wrapped up in
them."</p>

<p>"Nay, he never was bitter, Catherine," said the
old lady. "He knows what he is talking of. He<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_134" id="Page_134">[Pg 134]</a></span>
means no harm to the common women&mdash;for his wife
is one of them."</p>

<p>"We will not inquire too closely what he means,"
said Catherine Vernon with a smile. "Anyhow it
is very sweet to be able to retire while one has still
command of all one's faculties, and see the young
ones come in. Of course one does not expect to
live for ever. We are all in the Sunday period of
our lives, all of us here."</p>

<p>"Not I," said the old clerk, "with respect be it
spoken: I have had my Sunday and am ready to
begin again, if there should be any need of me."</p>

<p>"Which there is not, thank God," she said heartily.
And again there ensued that little pause. Was it
possible she did not observe it? No one echoed the
sentiment, no one even murmured the little nothings
with which a stillness, which has a meaning, is
generally filled up by some benevolent bystander.
What did it mean? Hester asked herself. But
Catherine took no notice. All had gone so well with
her. She was not afraid of evil tidings. Her
affection for the young men, her relations and
successors, was calm enough to secure her from the
anxious prescience of love. She took her life and
all that was connected with her, with that serene
and boundless faith which is the privilege of the
untried soul. Catherine would have resented beyond
everything else the imputation that her life was
without experience. She had gone through a great
deal, she thought. The evening long ago, when she
had been told that the credit of the Vernons was at<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_135" id="Page_135">[Pg 135]</a></span>
stake, and had roused herself to redeem it, had been
the highest crisis and turning-point of existence to
her. What had happened since had been little in
comparison. She had not known what anxiety meant
in the deepest sense of the word, and what had
happened before was so long over, that, though she
recollected every incident of that early time, it was
apart from all her after-life, and never influenced
her practical thoughts. She did not pay any attention
to that pause which might have awakened her
suspicions. There was no foundation in her for
suspicion to build upon. She was so sure of all connected
with her, and of herself, the first necessity
of all.</p>

<p>"I will never forget," said old Mr. Rule, after a
pause, "that night, when I had to go and warn you
that all was lost unless you would help. What a
night it was! I recollect now the light on Wilton
Street; the sunset shining in the Grange windows
as I rushed through the shrubbery. You were a
young lady then, Miss Vernon, and I could not tell
whether you would do it or not. Mrs. John, poor
thing, that I went to first, was never very wise&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>Here a sudden fit of coughing on the part of the
captain, and a stirring of Hester in the background,
showed the old clerk his mistake.</p>

<p>"I beg your pardon, Miss Hester," he cried, "I
was just going to tell something of your mother that
would please you. When I told her we wanted
money, she ran to her desk and got out all she had.
It was twenty pounds," said the old clerk with a<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_136" id="Page_136">[Pg 136]</a></span>
little laugh; "twenty pounds, when we wanted twice
as many thousands! But what did that matter?
Some people have laughed when I have told that
story, and some have been nearer crying."</p>

<p>He was an old man, and tears and laughter get
mixed up at that age; he was nearly crying himself
at the end.</p>

<p>Hester's heart gave a bound of mingled pleasure
and pain. Perhaps even she had never done justice
to her simple-hearted mother. She sat bolt upright
in her chair, listening with all her might. Catherine
Vernon seemed to retire from the principal place she
had hitherto held in the conversation, and Hester
came forward in her stead. She looked at the old
clerk steadily.</p>

<p>"You speak," she said, "of ladies only. Where
was my father?" holding Rule with her eye, so that
he could not escape.</p>

<p>"Your father!" he faltered, his very lips quivering
with surprise and consternation.</p>

<p>"I don't know why we should bring up all these
old stories to-night," said Catherine, suddenly, "nor
what led us to introduce the subject. Let bygones
be bygones, Mr. Rule. We old fogeys have our little
talks together, and tell over our old adventures to
amuse ourselves for want of something better; but
that is what the young ones never understand."</p>

<p>"Do you wish me to go away, Cousin Catherine?"
said Hester with her usual pale defiance, rising up
with the book in her arms.</p>

<p>"Oh no, not I. It does not matter in the least<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_137" id="Page_137">[Pg 137]</a></span>
whether you stay or go. I can remember, Uncle
Morgan, when the same sort of thing I am now
saying to Hester you used to say to me: and it does
not seem so very long ago either. Now we are all
old together, and not much difference between us,"
she said with a little laugh. It still gave her a
certain amusement to think that she was old like
these old people, and yet it was true; for though
sixty-five and eighty-five are very different, nobody
can doubt that sixty-five is old. It was still strange,
almost ludicrous, to Catherine, that it should
be so.</p>

<p>"I am of all ages," said the old captain, "for I can
remember all. I'll sail my boat with Alick to-morrow,
and enjoy it like a small boy (it's a capital
little boat, and will sail, I can tell you, Catherine, if
you took any interest in it), and then I shall walk on
the Common with a young lady, and talk of poetry
and love."</p>

<p>"Fie, captain!" said his old wife; "but he does
not mean all that nonsense, Hester."</p>

<p>"If love is nonsense, and poetry, she and I will go
to the stake for them," said the captain. "We'll take
a longer walk to-night, my dear, to prove to that old
woman how wrong she is."</p>

<p>"I can't wish you a pleasanter thing, captain&mdash;and
now I must be going," said old Rule, inconsequently.</p>

<p>Catherine, who had been sitting thoughtful since
the moment when she interfered, all unthanked and
misunderstood, to save Hester, rose when the old clerk
did, and went out before him, with her rich black silk<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_138" id="Page_138">[Pg 138]</a></span>
gown sweeping and rustling. The presence of the
elder people made her look blooming, and capable,
and young. The old couple watched her from their
window, as Rule, gratified and beaming, put her into
the carriage.</p>

<p>"She looks young enough to do as much again,"
said Captain Morgan, standing in the window with
his gum-bottle in his hands, with which he was
working.</p>

<p>"Oh, captain!" said his wife, "but where's the
money?" shaking her old head.</p>

<p>Hester behind peered out between these two aged
heads, pale with interest, and antagonism, and
attraction. She could never think of any one else
when Catherine was near, though all her instincts
were in arms against her. The words that passed
between the old people were as a foreign tongue to
her. She had not the slightest perception what they
meant.</p>

<p>Meantime Catherine spoke a warning word to her
former prime minister, who had abdicated later than
herself.</p>

<p>"You were very near giving that child a heartache,"
she said. "Take care not to say anything
before her. She need never know that her father
deserted his post. The creature has a quick sense of
honour, and it might wound her."</p>

<p>"She is not like his daughter," said the clerk,
"nor that poor lady's either. She is one of the pure
old Vernon stock."</p>

<p>"Do you think so?" said Catherine, indifferently.<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_139" id="Page_139">[Pg 139]</a></span>
"I rather dislike her than otherwise; but I would
not do the child any harm." And then the fat horses
put themselves in motion, and she gave a smile and
a bow to all her retainers and worshippers&mdash;and the
Miss Vernon-Ridgways drew away from Mrs. John's
window, where as usual they had been watching
Catherine, as she, amid all these visible signs of her
wealth and sovereignty, disappeared from their eyes.</p>

<p>"I suppose, Captain Morgan," said Hester that
evening, when she walked out with him as usual,
"that Cousin Catherine was young once?"</p>

<p>It seemed an absurd question, but it was put with
the utmost gravity; and Hester knew what she
meant, as perhaps the reader will too.</p>

<p>"About your age, my dear," the captain said,
promptly, "and not at all unlike you."</p>

<p>"Like me!"</p>

<p>"You think you are very different now, but there
is not much more difference than that of years. She
was the same kind of girl as you are&mdash;masterful&mdash;very
sure that her own way was the right one&mdash;obstinate
as a mule in her mind, but not so difficult
to move by the heart."</p>

<p>"Am I all that?" said Hester, wondering; "not
in some things, for I am never sure that I am right&mdash;or
any one else&mdash;except you, perhaps. No, it is
the other way, quite the other way! I am very sure
that I am wrong, and every one else&mdash;except you."</p>

<p>"A large rule and a small exception," said the old
man; "but it is the same thing. Catherine was rich
and had everything her own way. You are&mdash;in the<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_140" id="Page_140">[Pg 140]</a></span>
midst of a poor community where we can have
nothing our own way. And at your age you can't
discriminate any more than she could at hers."</p>

<p>"Then does it come to this, that money is everything?"
asked the disciple with some bitterness, but
without, as may be supposed, the slightest intention
of accepting the master's teaching on this point.</p>

<p>Captain Morgan made no reply. What he said
was&mdash;</p>

<p>"I should like to interest you in Catherine, my
dear; all that happened, you know, before we came
here, while we were busy with our own life, my wife
and I; but I have put this and that together since.
Catherine was, as people say, crossed in love, notwithstanding
her wealth and all her qualities. So
far as I can make out, the man preferred a woman
that could not hold the candle to her; not so pretty,
not so clever, altogether inferior. That must be
rather a blow to a woman!"</p>

<p>"A blow! What sort of a woman would she be
that cared for a man who did not care for her?"</p>

<p>This somewhat inarticulate sentiment Hester
delivered with an indignant blush and flashing
eyes.</p>

<p>"That is all very fine, my dear; but you are too
clear-headed to be taken in by it," said the captain.
"A woman might not show it, perhaps. I have no
reason to suppose that Catherine showed it. But
you must remember that a woman is not a woman
in the abstract, but Catherine or Hester as the case
may be, and liable to everything that humanity is<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_141" id="Page_141">[Pg 141]</a></span>
liable to; and she would be a poor creature indeed
if she were incapable of falling in love generously,
as a man is supposed to do."</p>

<p>"I don't know what you mean by generously!"</p>

<p>"Ah, but you do&mdash;none better. Something
however occurred after, much worse than his preference
of another woman. The man turned out to
be an unworthy man."</p>

<p>Hester had been following every word with
breathless interest. She grew quite pale, her lips
dropped apart, her eyes blazed out of the whiteness
of her face upon her old instructor. He went on
without taking note of this change,</p>

<p>"I should think for my part that there cannot be
any such blow as that. Don't you remember we
agreed it was the secret of all Hamlet's tragedy?
It is the tragedy of the world, my dear. I told the
old woman we were going to talk of love and poetry.
You see I was right."</p>

<p>"But&mdash;Catherine?"</p>

<p>Hester was, as became a girl, far too much interested
in the individual case to be able to stray to
the abstract, and in fact she had only assented to
her mentor's theory in respect to Hamlet, not having
begun such investigations for herself.</p>

<p>"Ay, Catherine. Well, that is just what happened
to her, my dear. The man first showed that he had
no appreciation of herself, which we will allow must
have wounded her; and then after, when that was
all over, proved himself unworthy, dishonourable&mdash;in
short, what the young men call a cad."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_142" id="Page_142">[Pg 142]</a></span></p>

<p>"Who was he?" asked Hester, in a low and
awe-stricken tone.</p>

<p>Then Captain Morgan turned to look at her, apparently
with some alarm; but his fears were quieted
by her face. She had evidently no clue to who it was.</p>

<p>"I never knew the man," he said quickly. "One
has no wish to know anything about him. The
interesting person is the woman in such a case.
Here, Hester, you must be the teacher. Tell me,
what would that discovery do to a girl, a daring,
masterful spirit like you?"</p>

<p>"Oh, captain, I am not daring or masterful,"
cried the girl clasping her hands; "don't you know
it is cruel to call me so&mdash;I that can do nothing, that
am only like a straw tossing on the water, carried the
way I would not. If I were masterful, I would go
away from here. I would do something for myself."</p>

<p>"All that is no answer to my question," the old
captain said.</p>

<p>Hester was used to follow his leading at a touch.
There was a kind of mesmerism in the effect he
had upon her.</p>

<p>"I cannot tell," she said in a low and hurried
voice. "I don't see: it would turn all the world
wrong. It would&mdash;&mdash; But," she added, collecting
herself, "she would throw him away from her like a
dead thing. He would be dead. She would think
of him no more. Unworthy! One shakes one's
self free&mdash;one is done with that!"</p>

<p>"Look again," said the old man, with a half smile,
shaking his head.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_143" id="Page_143">[Pg 143]</a></span></p>

<p>"I don't wish to look again. Is not that enough?
I suppose it would make her very unhappy. She
would struggle, she would try to find excuses. Oh,
Captain Morgan, don't press me so! I suppose everything
would turn round and round. There would
seem nothing to stand on, nothing to look up to,
the skies would all whirl and the solid ground.
It makes my head swim to think of it," the girl
cried, covering her eyes with her hands.</p>

<p>"That was how it was with Catherine, so far as I
know. She had to exert herself to save the bank,
and that saved her."</p>

<p>"Had he anything to do with the bank?" she
asked quickly.</p>

<p>"My dear, I tell you I was not here at the time,"
said the wary old man. "I had no knowledge of
the circumstances. I never wish to know who he
was, lest perhaps I should fail in charity towards
him. It is Catherine I want you to think of. The
bank troubles came afterwards, and she had to get
up and put her shoulder to the wheel, which saved
her. But do you think the world ever looked the
same after? Hamlet would never have discovered
what traitors those young courtiers were, if his
mother had not turned out a fraud, and his love a
delusion&mdash;at least that is my opinion. The wonder
is, he did not misdoubt Horatio too. That is what
I should have done if it had been me. But there is
the good of genius, Hester; the Master who knew
everything knew better. Catherine had a sort of
honest Horatio in old Rule, and she had that work<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_144" id="Page_144">[Pg 144]</a></span>
to do, which was the best thing for her. But you
may be sure the world was all dissolving views, and
nothing solid in it for years to come."</p>

<p>Hester, after the shock of the realisation which
had been forced upon her, as to what the result
of such a calamity would be, felt exhausted and
sick at heart, as if all her strength had been worn
out.</p>

<p>"Why did you want me to know this?" she said
at last. "I see no signs of it in her. She looks so
triumphant, as if nothing had ever happened or
could happen. She sees through everybody and
laughs at them, as if all their lies could never touch
her. Oh, she sees very well how they lie, but is
never angry, only laughs; is that the way to make
one love her? And she does not know the false
from the true," the girl cried with an access of
indignation. "She considers us all the same."</p>

<p>"No&mdash;no&mdash;no&mdash;no," said the old man, patting
her arm, but he did not press her any further. He
had said as much as he wanted to say. They went
further than usual over the Common as he had
threatened to his wife, and as they returned the
old captain owned himself fatigued and took
Hester's arm. "You must be my great-grandchild
in the spirit," he said. "We had a little girl once,
my wife and I. I have often fancied her grown up
and married and having children in her turn. Oh,
I am a great dreamer and an old fool. You remember
Elia's dream children, and then Tennyson,
though he was not old enough to know anything<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_145" id="Page_145">[Pg 145]</a></span>
about it, making the unborn faces shine beside the
never-lighted fire. These poets make fools of us all,
Hester. They know everything without any way to
know it. I fancy you are one of little Mary's grandchildren.
She must be as old as Catherine Vernon,
though age, we may suppose, doesn't count where
she is."</p>

<p>"You never told me about <i>her</i>."</p>

<p>"There was nothing to tell," he said cheerfully.
"Her mother cries still if you speak of little Mary,
but not I. It would have been a great thing for us
if we could have kept her, but she would have
married I suppose, and her husband might not have
pleased me. I have thought of that. She would
have been taken in probably, and brought us some
man I could not put up with, though the children
might have been an addition. I dare say she would
have turned out a soft, innocent creature, taken in
all round, something like your mother, Hester. You
are tempted to despise that, you clever ones, but it
is a great mistake."</p>

<p>"Oh, Captain Morgan, mother is taken in, as you
say, because she thinks everybody true&mdash;but she is
true always."</p>

<p>"<i>Always!</i>" said the old man with fervour, "and
far happier because she does not find it out. My
wife is the same. It is such souls as these that keep
the world steady. We should all tumble to pieces
if the race was made up of people like Catherine
Vernon and you."</p>

<p>"I wish you would not say Catherine Vernon<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_146" id="Page_146">[Pg 146]</a></span>
and me!" said Hester passionately; "there is no
likeness, none at all&mdash;none at all!"</p>

<p>But the old captain only laughed, and turned her
attention to the sunset, which was lighting up all
the western sky. The pines stood up against it like
rigid black shadows, cut out against the golden light
which was belted with flaming lines of crimson.
Overhead the sky ascended in varying tints of
daffodil and faint ethereal greenness up to the deep
yet bright summer blue. The last gleams caught
the yellow gorse upon the Common and turned every
blossom into gold, and all the peaks of the Vernonry
rose black against the radiance of the west.</p>

<p>"I wonder if the people <i>up there</i> have any hand
in it?" said the old man. "I should like to think
so. The old landscape painters, perhaps, that never
had such colours to work with before. But in that
case there would be nothing for me to do," he added
with a laugh, "unless it was some small post about
the gunneries. I was always fond of my guns."</p>

<p>To Hester this light suggestion, and the laugh
with which it was accompanied, sounded profane.
She shrank from anything which could take away
the awe and mystery from death, just as the old
man, who was so near the threshold, liked to
familiarise himself with the thought of going over
it, and still finding himself a recognisable creature
there.</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_147" id="Page_147">[Pg 147]</a></span></p>




<h2><a name="CHAPTER_X" id="CHAPTER_X">CHAPTER X.</a></h2>

<h3>A LOVER.</h3>


<p>It was about this time that Hester became aware
of a circumstance the most important that could
possibly happen in a young woman's life. There
had been no opportunity for her to become acquainted
with the emulations and rivalship of other
girls. Girls there were none about the Vernonry,
nor did they abound in the neighbourhood, in the
class from which alone her mother's visitors were
chosen. Mrs. John, it has been said, belonged to
a county family, a fact of which she was as proud as
it is natural and becoming a woman should be. She
did not altogether frown upon the few callers from
the town who thought it only their duty to Miss
Vernon, the most hospitable entertainer in the
neighbourhood, to take a little notice of the pensioners,
as the poor ladies at the Vernonry were
called; but she did not encourage these benevolent
visitors. "They are all ladies, and as good as any
of us," Mrs. Redfern had been heard to say, who was<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_148" id="Page_148">[Pg 148]</a></span>
the mayor's lady, and considered herself a leader of
society; and it was a beautiful sight to see Mrs.
John, in her old-fashioned dark room and simplest
black gown, receiving with kind condescension, and
endeavouring to set at her ease, this very fine lady,
who considered herself to be paying the poor widow
a quite undeserved honour. Mrs. John returned
cards only in acknowledgment of Mrs. Redfern's
visit, and there the acquaintance ended. So that
Hester lost altogether the opportunity of knowing
how ordinary girls looked and talked, and what was
the object of their ambition. She had not even,
which may surprise some people, come to any conclusion
whatever in respect to her own personal
appearance. Sometimes indeed, it cannot be denied,
she had looked up in the midst of a novel, where
all the young persons in whom the reader was
supposed to take any interest were beautiful, and
asked herself vaguely, with a blush, feeling ashamed
of the question, whether she was pretty. But partly
she was ashamed to give the time necessary to the
solution of the problem, and partly she had not the
data upon which to form her conclusions. There
was a beautiful girl in Redborough in a humble
position, upon whose claims everybody was agreed,
but she was a queenly creature, with dark hair
and blue eyes, and features of the most exquisite
regularity, to whom Hester could not flatter herself
that she bore the slightest resemblance. Nor was
she like Ellen Vernon, with her lovely fairness, her
look of wax and confectionary. Hester was not<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_149" id="Page_149">[Pg 149]</a></span>
ethereal at all. There was no smallness about her,
though she was slim as became her age. "The
springy motion in her gait," the swift, light step
which never tired, were beautiful in their way, and
so was the eager outlook in her eyes, which seemed
to contract and expand according to the degree of
interest with which outside subjects moved them;
but all this rather as exponents of the mind within
than as merely physical features. Her hair had
never grown long, not much longer indeed than was
just necessary to twist into the knot behind which
proved her to be grown up, and it remained full of
curl and ready to break the smoothness of outline
then thought necessary, on the smallest provocation.
Her complexion was very variable, sometimes radiant
with flutters of sudden colour, sometimes relapsing
into a rose-tinted whiteness, more white than pale.
Her features were not much to brag of; it was the
play of prompt feeling in her face, the interest, the
indignation, the pity, the perpetual change and
vicissitude, that made it attractive, and on this
point of course Hester could not judge. Seeing
that her mouth was too large, and her nose too
short, and her eyebrows too marked, she concluded
that she was not pretty, and regretted it, though in
her circumstances it mattered very little; her friends
liked her just as well, whether or not; and she was
never likely to produce the effect which the heroines
in novels&mdash;even though comparatively plain&mdash;did
produce. So she decided, with a little shame to
think that she could have been disturbed about the<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_150" id="Page_150">[Pg 150]</a></span>
matter, that it was not worth going into it further.
All the same it is a pity, for the sake of young
readers, that all the girls in novels, with so very
rare exceptions&mdash;and Jane Eyre, if not pretty,
probably was less plain than she thought, and certainly
was <i>aga&ccedil;ante</i>, which is much more effective&mdash;should
be beautiful and should have so much
admiration and conquest. The girls who read are
apt to wonder how it is that they have not the same
fortune. Hester, for her part, had a fine scorn of
feminine victories in this sort; they had never come
within the possibilities of her lot. She never went
to balls, nor met in society gangs of suitors contending
for her smile; she did not believe in such
things, and she thought she despised them.</p>

<p>It was in the very midst of this scepticism that
she suddenly became aware of certain facts which,
as we have said, were of the kind generally supposed
to be most important in a young woman's life.
Harry Vernon had been for some time alone in the
splendour of the White House; Ellen, who had
inflicted so deep a wound upon Hester's inexperienced
girlhood, had married the previous summer,
and in the lack of young ladies worthy to swell her
train on that occasion, had selected Hester as one of
her bridesmaids. Hester had never forgiven her
frivolous kinswoman for that first disenchantment
of her youth, but her mother, upon whom her
exclusion from society and from all opportunities of
distinguishing herself there weighed heavily, had
insisted on the acceptance of the invitation, and<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_151" id="Page_151">[Pg 151]</a></span>
Hester had figured accordingly in a white muslin
frock, much too simple to match the toilette of the
other bridesmaids in the pageant, greatly to her own
disquiet. She was the only Vernon in it, and thus
had been specially put forward, and Ellen, altogether
unconscious of previous offence, had exhausted herself
in demonstrations of affection to her young
relative. It was she whom Harry led out in the
morning's procession, and he had, in the intervals
of his duty to his guests, come back again and again
to her side. Hester, all inexperienced and unknowing,
had paid little attention to these early indications.
She did not identify him with his sister's
guilt towards her. He was a weak, good-natured,
genial fellow, and no more. If Harry did anything
wrong, no doubt it was because of being led astray.
In himself he wished nothing but good to any one.
He was not clever, he was steady and stolid, and
went through both work and pleasure without much
discrimination as to which was which, carrying on
both in the same way. When he began to come
to the Vernonry evening after evening, Hester paid
little attention to him. She would go out to walk
with old Captain Morgan in the very face of the
young visitor whose "intentions" all the community
considered to be of such importance. Hester never
thought of his "intentions." She had none herself
in which he was anyhow involved. She was perfectly
friendly when they met, but she did not care
whether they ever met or not, and repulsed him as
much as steady indifference can repulse an obstinate<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_152" id="Page_152">[Pg 152]</a></span>
and not very clear-sighted young man. But this
was not saying much. Harry knew as well as any
one that his suit was a wonderful chance for his
distant cousin; that Hester had no right to look for
such good fortune as that of being the object of his
affections. He knew that he was bringing in his
hand everything a girl need wish for. And so far
as Hester's course of action was concerned, though
he was much irritated by it sometimes, he still felt
that it was what she had a right to employ in the
circumstances. It "drew a fellow on;" she was right
to do what she could to obtain this so desirable
consummation. He could not find fault with her
even when he was angry. Had she been too ready
to meet him, he felt that he would himself have
despised what was so easily won. But her coyness,
her apparent indifference, her walking out to the
old captain from her lover, all helped to rivet his
chains. It was excellent policy, and he took it as
such; it drew a fellow on.</p>

<p>And it would be impossible to describe the interest
of the Vernonry in this new development. Harry
made his appearance first when they were all outside
enjoying the beauty of the summer evening,
Mr. Mildmay Vernon occupying that bench in front
of the verandah, which was the most desirable place
in the evening, being just clear of the low sunbeams
which came into your eyes through the trunks of
the pines, penetrating like golden arrows. Mrs.
John herself was watering the plants in the verandah,
which were a little exhausted by the long, scorching<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_153" id="Page_153">[Pg 153]</a></span>
day, and wanted refreshment. The Miss Vernon-Ridgways
were walking about with their long sashes
extended and their large sleeves flying, the one
eagerly talking from a few paces behind her, to the
other. Their conversation was on the well-worn
subject of "some people who never knew their own
place," and was aimed at the tranquil gentleman on
the bench, who when he had secured his own comfort,
which was the first thing to be thought of,
rather prided himself upon never interfering with
his neighbours. When Harry Vernon appeared,
there was a universal stir. The sisters made a little
flight round him, gazing at him. "I do believe it
is Harry. Is it Harry?" they said. Mr. Mildmay
Vernon put down his paper in the midst of a paragraph,
and came forward with his most genial air.
"I hope this is a visit only. I hope there is nothing
wrong," he said.</p>

<p>"Wrong! what should be wrong?" said Harry,
turning his fair countenance wonderingly upon the
group. "It's a lovely evening, and I wanted a walk,"
he added, with a little reddening of that too fair
face; "and besides, I've got a message from Ellen
to Mrs. John&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Dear Ellen! How is Ellen? When is she
coming home?" cried Miss Matilda. "When you
write to her, give her our love. But I suppose she
is too happy to care about anybody's love save one
person's. Marriage will improve Ellen&mdash;marriage
will steady her. She used to be a little forgetful,
perhaps. Ah! marriage will do her a great deal<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_154" id="Page_154">[Pg 154]</a></span>
of good. She had everything too much her own
way."</p>

<p>"But she is missed. It would be pretty to see her
again&mdash;forgetting," said Mr. Mildmay, "that she had
ever set eyes on you before."</p>

<p>"Ah, dear Ellen! We should not have known
her without her little ways!"</p>

<p>Now Harry was fond of his sister.</p>

<p>"I'll thank you to leave Ellen alone," he said,
brusquely. "I dare say we've all got our little ways.
I had something to say to Mrs. John if you'll let
me pass, please."</p>

<p>"Politeness is characteristic of our family," said
Miss Matilda, drawing her skirts closely round her,
and standing ostentatiously, though she was not very
near him, out of his way.</p>

<p>Mrs. John stood looking on in the verandah with
the watering-can in her hand, not hearing much of
what they said, but feeling that it was uncivil, and
putting on a little deprecating, anxious smile&mdash;</p>

<p>"Come in," she said, "come in. The parlour, I
think, is almost cooler than the garden after this hot
day. Shall I make you a cup of tea?"</p>

<p>"These pensioners of Aunt Catherine's are odious
people," said Harry. "It was you and Hester I came
to see."</p>

<p>"You must not speak of them so&mdash;they would not
like it," said Mrs. John, not thinking that she herself
might be spoken of in the same way, though rather
pleased at the bottom of her heart that Harry should
make a distinction between them. He threw himself<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_155" id="Page_155">[Pg 155]</a></span>
down in a chair, which creaked under his weight,
and looked very large and mannish in the little
feminine room&mdash;rather, indeed, it must be allowed,
out of place there.</p>

<p>"I wonder how you can get on in such a poky
little place," he said. "I should like to see you in
handsome big rooms; it would seem much more
natural."</p>

<p>Mrs. John smiled again, a deprecating, half-apologetic
smile.</p>

<p>"Oh, I am very glad to be here. I did not expect
ever to have to live in such a poor place when I
married, it is true; but people's minds change with
their circumstances. I am glad to have it&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"You oughtn't to&mdash;you should have been provided
for in a different way. Ah, Hester! I am so glad to
see you," Harry said, rising with some commotion to
his feet. He took Hester's hand and held it for a
moment. "I thought I'd come and tell you about
Ellen," he said, with a blush.</p>

<p>"Hester," said her mother, giving her a little
meaning look, of which she did not understand the
signification, "you must give Mr. Harry a cup of tea."</p>

<p>And there he sat, to her great oppression, for an
hour at least. He did not even tell them about Ellen.
He said nothing in particular&mdash;nothing which it
was necessary to say. Hester, who had intended
to go out with her old captain, felt herself bound by
politeness and her mother's warning looks. She did
not know what these looks meant, but they held her
fast. There was not very much conversation.<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_156" id="Page_156">[Pg 156]</a></span>
He said a few things over and over, which made it
difficult to change the subject; and it was mostly
Mrs. John who replied, and who rather liked, also,
to repeat the same sentiment. Hester poured out
the tea, and when the moment came for that,
lighted the candles, and sat down in the background
and took her work. She was not very fond of work,
but it was better than doing nothing at all. When
she took that seat which was beyond his point of
vision, Harry turned his chair round so as to face
her, and took up one of the candles and arranged it
for her, that she might see to work. "You should
have a lamp," he said. "I have a nice little lamp at
home just the thing for you; you must let me send
it." What a long time he sat, and how anxious he
was to make himself agreeable! After that he came
three or four times in succession. Mrs. John began
to look for him, brightening up as the hour of his
visit approached; and the neighbours kept up a
watch which it was impossible to mistake. "If he
comes to-night again I shall know what to think,"
Miss Matilda said. But when he came that night he
met Hester at the gate in her out-door apparel.
Harry's countenance fell.</p>

<p>"Oh, you are surely not going out," he said, "not
just when I come? You couldn't be so unkind."</p>

<p>"I have been unkind to Captain Morgan very
often," said Hester. "I must not neglect him to-night,"
and she passed him quickly with a little bow
and smile. It made Harry very angry, but still he
felt that it drew a fellow on.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_157" id="Page_157">[Pg 157]</a></span></p>

<p>On one of these occasions, when Hester eluded
him in this way, Harry spoke his mind to Mrs. John.</p>

<p>"I'm very lonely up there by myself," he said,
"and I have nobody to please but myself. Ellen
used to interfere and keep me in order, as she said;
but now she's got somebody else to look after. I've
thought a great deal of Hester for years back. That
time when we came to see you first, you know, when
Ellen made so many advances and forgot all about
them&mdash;that was her way. She's not a bad sort when
you get safe hold of her&mdash;but it's her way. Well,
from that time I've thought of Hester, though I
never liked to say a word as long as Ellen was
there."</p>

<p>"Oh, Mr. Harry," said Mrs. John, who was
fluttered and flattered as if a proposal were being
made to herself. "She was only a child in those
days."</p>

<p>"I know; but she isn't a child now. If she'll
have me&mdash;and I can't see why she shouldn't have me&mdash;we
might all make each other very comfortable.
I'm not frightened of a mother-in-law as so many
fellows are. I believe that's all bosh. I shouldn't
wish to part you more than for the honeymoon, you
know. There is plenty of room for you in the White
House, and it would be always nice for her to have
you there, when I happened to be engaged. I think
we should hit it off very well together. And as for
money&mdash;I know she has no money&mdash;I should never
think twice about that. Of course it would be to my
own advantage to make as good settlements as<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_158" id="Page_158">[Pg 158]</a></span>
possible, which is always a good thing in business
when one never knows what may happen. We might
have to consult Aunt Catherine just at first, for she
always keeps a hold on the funds&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"And there's Hester to consult&mdash;that is the most
important," said Mrs. John.</p>

<p>"To be sure, that's the most important; but I
can't see why she should object," said Harry. "Why,
she has never seen any one, has she? I am the only
man that has paid any attention to her. At Ellen's
wedding there were one or two, and that was only
once in a way. I don't say she likes me, but she
can't like any one else, can she? for she has never
seen anybody."</p>

<p>"Not that I know of," said Mrs. John; "but, Mr.
Harry, girls are so fanciful. You cannot be sure of
them in that way. They may have some ideal in
their heads, though they have never met any
one&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Eh?" said Harry, making a large mouthful of
the word, and opening wide those blue eyes of his
with the light lashes. And, indeed, he did not
know much about that sort of thing. He returned
to the question without paying any attention to this
strange piece of nonsense. "There's nobody about
but the old gentlemen, and Ned at Aunt Catherine's.
Sometimes I've felt a little suspicious of
Ned. Does he come and see you often? He is a
great fellow for books and that sort of thing."</p>

<p>"Mr. Edward Vernon," said Mrs. John, a little
stiffly, "<i>never</i> comes here. Hester, I believe has met<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_159" id="Page_159">[Pg 159]</a></span>
him at the Grange or elsewhere; but he never comes
here. I scarcely know him, neither of course does
she."</p>

<p>"Then," said Harry, taking no notice of the offence
in her tone, but bringing down his hand vehemently
upon his knee, "if it isn't Ned, there is no one she
can have seen, and the field is all clear for me."</p>

<p>"That is very true," said Hester's mother, but her
tone was doubtful. "At the same time," she continued,
"perhaps it would be well to let me talk to
her a little first, Mr. Harry, just to see, before you
said anything."</p>

<p>"If she doesn't want to have me, I don't wish to
force her to have me," said Harry, his pride taking
alarm.</p>

<p>"Force&mdash;oh, Mr. Harry, do you think I would
force my child? And indeed I couldn't;" cried Mrs.
John, shaking her head. "She is far, far stronger
than I."</p>

<p>"She would be the cleverest of us all," said Harry
admiringly. "I believe she is as clever as Aunt
Catherine. I dare say she might even find out
dodges in the bank, like Aunt Catherine did. Perhaps
on the whole it might be better if you would
sound her a bit, eh? and find out what she is up to.
What she thinks of me, for instance," said Harry,
nodding half with modesty, half with vanity. "Yes,
I should like that. I should like to be pretty sure
before I committed myself. A man doesn't like to
make a fool of himself for nothing," the young man
said.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_160" id="Page_160">[Pg 160]</a></span></p>

<p>Mrs. John thought it was quite natural. And
indeed all her feelings were enlisted on Harry's side,
who expressed himself so beautifully. What better
could happen to Hester than to be thus uplifted to
the heights of luxury and wealth, the White House,
and everything else that heart could desire, with a
nice husband, so good-looking, so tall, so fair, and so
anxious to be kind to her mother? Her imagination,
not her strong point on ordinary occasions, was
strong enough on this, to jump at all the advantages
of the match with a rapidity which would not have
disgraced Hester herself. To see her child the
mistress of the White House was the very height of
Mrs. John's ambition. She did not feel that the
world held anything more desirable. Her mind
made a hurried rush through the rooms, all so
familiar to her, and which Harry, no doubt, would
re-model in preparation for his bride. With what
pride and happiness would she see her child at the
head of the table, where she herself had once sat!
It would be a return more triumphant than any
return in her own person. And yet she would be
there too, the happy spectator, the witness of it all.
She saw in her mind's eye, the wedding, the beautiful
clothes, the phaeton, and the high-stepping
horses, and perhaps a pony carriage which Hester
herself would drive. All this in a moment, while
Harry was telling her that he would like to be pretty
sure before he committed himself. Perhaps it was
not a lofty sentiment, but she felt it to be quite
natural. A man with so much to bestow had a<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_161" id="Page_161">[Pg 161]</a></span>
right to see his way before him, and then for Hester's
own sake it was far better that she should not be
taken by surprise. She was a perverse girl, and if
the young man walked straight up to her without
warning, and asked her to marry him, the chances
were that she would refuse. That was not a risk to
be run when so much was at stake.</p>

<p>"If you will leave it in my hands, I think you
will have no cause to regret it," she said, nodding
her head at him with the softest maternal smile.
"You may be sure you will have my good wishes."</p>

<p>They were both quite affected when he took his
leave.</p>

<p>"I feel sure we should hit it off together," Harry
said, warmly grasping her hand; and the water stood
in her eyes. She could almost have given him a kiss
as he stood before her, a little flushed and agitated
with his self-revelation. Indeed, she would have
done so but for that doubt about Hester. What
would Hester say? That was the one point upon
which doubt existed, and unfortunately it was the
most important of all. There could not be the least
uncertainty as to the many advantages of the
match; money, comfort, good position, good connection,
everything that can be wished for in
marriage, and with no personal defects to be glossed
over by these advantages, but a fine young man, a
husband any girl might be proud of. Elation and
gladness filled Mrs. John's heart, when she contemplated
that side of the question; but when she
turned to the other a chill came over her, a cloud<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_162" id="Page_162">[Pg 162]</a></span>
that swallowed up the sunshine. What would
Hester say? Oh the perverseness of girls that
never know what is good for them! If it had been
somebody quite ineligible, somebody without a
penny, the chances were that Hester would have had
no doubt on the subject. Mrs. John could not
remain still after this momentous conversation. She
went from one window to another, looking out,
watching for her daughter's return. She had been
vexed that Hester should have been so uncivil as to
go away for no better reason than to walk with old
Captain Morgan when Harry was coming, but she
felt now that this contradictoriness on the girl's part
had been providential. How full her head was with
thoughts and plans how to speak, and what to say, with
artful approaches to the subject, and innocent wiles
by which to divert all suspicion, and lead Hester
unawares towards that goal! She trotted up stairs
and down, from one window to another, framing
dialogue after dialogue in her mind. She was
astonished by her own powers as she did so. If she
ever had been so clever in reality as she was in this
sudden crisis of imagination, she felt that it might
have made a difference in her whole life. And one
thing Mrs. John had the wisdom and goodness to do
in the midst of her excitement, she kept within her
own house, and did not so much as venture down to
the verandah, where she might have been seen from
outside, and pounced upon by the eager watchers,
brimful of curiosity, who wanted to know what it all
meant. Miss Matilda Vernon-Ridgway, as has been<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_163" id="Page_163">[Pg 163]</a></span>
intimated, had been conscious of an internal admonition
that something critical, something decisive,
something throwing a distinct light upon the "intentions"
of young Harry would happen this night.
And Mrs. John knew herself, and was aware that
she never would be able to stand against the questionings
of these curious spectators. Her only safety
was in keeping out of their way. Thus not only
her imaginations, but her moral faculties, her power
of self-control and self-denial, were strengthened by
the occurrences of this momentous evening. She
had not felt so important before since Hester was
born.</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_164" id="Page_164">[Pg 164]</a></span></p>




<h2><a name="CHAPTER_XI" id="CHAPTER_XI">CHAPTER XI.</a></h2>

<h3>MOTHER AND DAUGHTER.</h3>


<p>Mrs. John had a long time to wait. The old
captain prolonged his walk, as he was too apt to do,
beyond his strength, and came home very slowly,
leaning on Hester's arm; and then as every hindrance,
when people are anxious, has a way of
doubling itself, Mrs. Morgan sent a polite message
to say that she hoped Mrs. John Vernon would not
object if she kept Hester to supper. Mrs. John
objected greatly, but she was weak, and had never
set up her own will in the face of any one else who
made a stand for theirs. She said "Oh yes, with
pleasure," with a pitiful little smile to Mrs. Morgan's
maid. To deny Hester anything (except the power of
making a governess of herself and losing caste) was
what she had never done in her life. It always gave
her a little pang when her child left her to eat her
solitary meal in the dark little parlour which nothing
would light up, but she had trained herself to feel
that this was very wrong, and that young people need<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_165" id="Page_165">[Pg 165]</a></span>
change. Hester was entirely unacquainted with the
series of little sacrifices which her mother thus made
for her. If she thought of them at all, she thought
that the poor lady "did not mind." Her old friends
next door were not gay, but they talked as Mrs. John
was quite incapable of talking, and lived, though
they saw nobody, in a wider atmosphere, a bigger
world than any of the others. The old captain's
stories, the people he had seen, the experiences both
these old people had gone through, were like another
world to Hester. Her mother was small and straitened,
had seen without seeing, and lived without
living. In the days when Hester had guided her
about by the arm, taking her whither she pleased,
making new eyes for her in the vividness of her own,
it was enough for the girl to have that echo of all
her sentiments, that little objection generally ending
with agreement, that broken little stream of faint
recollections which her mother would give forth.
But Hester had long ceased to form part of that
sort of dual being which is so often made by a
mother and her only daughter. To feel your parent
smaller and sillier than yourself is sad. A great
many young people do it without any adequate
reason, strong in their sense of being the reigning
monarchs of the present, while their progenitors
belong to the past. Perhaps indeed it is the nature
of youth to take a pleasure in such superiority.
But that is very different from the fact of actual
incapacity on the mother's part to follow her child's
thoughts or even to know what she meant. Mrs.<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_166" id="Page_166">[Pg 166]</a></span>
John was very well aware of it herself, and declared
with a smiling countenance that young people liked
change, and that she was never so happy as when
her child was enjoying herself. And Hester, though
she was so much more clever, accepted all this, and
believed and thought her mother was quite contented
with the evening paper, or a book from the
circulating library, and never missed her when she
was away. She misunderstood her silly mother, far
more than that silly mother did her. The lesser
comprehended the bigger, not the bigger the lesser,
as in the ordinary course of affairs. Mrs. John
had a great many sacrifices to make, of which her
daughter was quite unconscious. And to-night the
poor lady felt it, as with her mind so full she sat
down at her little solitary table, which she had made
pretty for Hester. There was nothing on it more
luxurious than cold meat and salad, but the crisp
greenness of the leaves, the little round loaf, the pat
of butter in a small silver dish which was one of her
relics, the creaming glass of milk, all set out upon a
white cloth and lighted up by the two candles, would,
she had flattered herself, call out an admiring
exclamation when the girl came in out of the dark,
a little dazzled for the first moment by the light.
After she had said "Oh, yes, with pleasure," Mrs.
John came in and sat down and cried. Such a pretty
table laid out, and oh, for once, so much to say! her
mind so overflowing, her news so all important!
There could not be anything so exciting to talk
about, that was certain, on the other side of the<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_167" id="Page_167">[Pg 167]</a></span>
partition, and this provoked and tantalised sense of
having herself far better entertainment for Hester
than she could be having, gave an insufferableness
to the position. At one moment Mrs. John thought
she must send for the girl, that she could not put up
with the disappointment, but she was much more
used to putting up with things, than to asserting
herself. She sat down very cheerlessly and ate a
mouthful of bread and salad. To eat alone is always
miserable. Hester was making the table, where the
old Morgans sat, very lively and cheerful, talking as
she never talked with her mother. They sat and
talked quite late into the night. What with the
captain's stories, and Mrs. Morgan's elucidations
and Hester's questionings, the evening was full of
interest. It flew away so quickly that when the clock
struck eleven the girl sprang up with a great sense
of guilt. "Eleven o'clock! what will mother say?
I have never been so late before," she cried. They
were all half proud of it, of having been so mutually
entertaining. "The poor little mother must have
felt lonely," Mrs. Morgan said, with a passing
compunction when Hester flew round the corner,
watched from the door to see that all was safe by
the maid; but the captain took no notice. "It is
delightful to see how that child enjoys herself,"
he said, flattered in spite of himself, "though it's
no very intoxicating amusement we furnish her."
Captain Morgan was very soft-hearted, and understood
by his affections as well as with his understanding,
but in this case something beguiled him,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_168" id="Page_168">[Pg 168]</a></span>
perhaps a little complacency, perhaps want of
thought.</p>

<p>When Hester ran in, in the dark, locking the
door of the verandah behind her, Mrs. John had
gone up stairs and was going to bed. She was
chilly and "cross" her daughter thought, who ran
quickly up to her full of apologies. "We got
talking," she said; "you must forgive me, mother.
The captain's stories run on so, one into another&mdash;one
forgets how the time runs on too."</p>

<p>"I wish," said Mrs. John, with the tears very
near the surface, "that your mother was sometimes
as amusing as the captain." It was the greatest reproach
she had addressed to her daughter for years.</p>

<p>"Oh, mother! If I had thought you minded,"
cried Hester, with wondering eyes.</p>

<p>Mrs. John was penitent at once, and did her best
to make things up. "I ought not to speak," she
said, "after all&mdash;for I was not so very lonely. Harry
stayed a long time and kept me company. It is
only when you have him to yourself that you see
how nice he is."</p>

<p>"Is he so nice?" said Hester, indifferently.
"How lucky for him to find you alone," she added,
with a little laugh.</p>

<p>"Oh, Hester, how can you say so. As if it was
me he came for! Whatever you may try to make
yourself believe you can't think that."</p>

<p>Hester made no reply. She slept in a small room
within her mother's, the door of which always stood
open. She had taken off her out-door things and<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_169" id="Page_169">[Pg 169]</a></span>
let down her hair to brush it. It hung about her in
a cloud, running up into curls as soon as she let it
free. Mrs. John, seated in the easiest chair, sat
contemplating this operation with a mixture of
pleasure and pain. The mass of curls was pretty,
but it was not the fashion. It was quite unlike the
smooth brown glossy locks that had adorned her own
head when she was young. But she said to herself
that it suited Hester, and gazed at her child
admiringly, yet anxiously, conscious of many things
in which she might be improved: her hair for one
thing: and her waist, which was not so small as
Mrs. John's had been in her youth: and her nose,
which was a little too short. And yet with all these
defects she was pretty. When she was Harry's wife
everybody would admire her. Perhaps it was only
because she was not sufficiently seen that she had no
more admirers now.</p>

<p>"I had a great deal to say to you, dear," she said.
"I don't grudge you being away when you are
enjoying yourself, but I had many things to say.
It is not likely that Harry Vernon would sit with
me for hours for nothing."</p>

<p>"I suppose," said Hester, from the midst of her
curls, "that he finds it dull now without Ellen at
the White House?"</p>

<p>"I could tell you a great deal about that," said
her mother quickly, eager to seize an opening. But
Hester yawned with discouraging demonstrations of
fatigue.</p>

<p>"Don't you think it will keep till to-morrow,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_170" id="Page_170">[Pg 170]</a></span>
mother? We had a long walk, and I am sleepy.
I think Harry can't be very urgent. To-morrow
will be time enough."</p>

<p>"Oh, Hester, how strange you are," cried Mrs.
John, "so pleased with those old people, ready to
listen to all their old stories; but when I begin to
talk to you of a thing that is of the greatest
importance&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Nothing concerning Harry Vernon can be of
great importance to me," cried the perverse girl;
and then she tried to turn off her wilfulness with a
laugh. "The beauty of the captain's stories is that
they are of no importance, mother. You can have
them when you please. It is like going to a theatre,
or reading a book."</p>

<p>"I am not so clever as the captain to interest
you," Mrs. John said.</p>

<p>There was a plaintive tone in her voice with which
Hester was very well acquainted, and which betokened
an inclination to tears. She came and
kissed her mother, and gave her a few of those
half-impatient caresses which generally soothed the
poor lady. The girl did not in the least know that
any consciousness was in Mrs. John's mind of the
superficial character of those kindnesses. She was
not without love for the tender domestic creature
who had been hers to use at her pleasure since ever
she could recollect, but she bestowed these kisses
upon her, as she would have given sweetmeats to
a child.</p>

<p>"Go to bed, mother. Don't mind me. I will<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_171" id="Page_171">[Pg 171]</a></span>
shut the door; you shall not have the light in
your eyes to keep you from sleeping. Go to bed,
mammy darling."</p>

<p>Mrs. John had liked this caressing talk when
Hester was a child. She was soothed by it still,
though a faint sense that there was something like
contempt in it had got into her mind: and she could
not struggle against a will which was so much
stronger than her own. But she could not sleep,
though she allowed herself to be put to bed. She
could not help crying in the night, and wondering
what she could do to be more respected, to be more
important to her child; and then she prayed that
she might be able to put Harry before her in the
best light, and stopped and wondered whether it were
right to pray about a young man. Altogether Mrs.
John had not a tranquil night.</p>

<p>But next morning she made a great effort to dismiss
her anxiety, to present herself at breakfast with
a cheerful aspect, and to get rid of that plaintive
tone which she was herself aware of, which she had
so often tried to remedy. Instead of it she tried a
little jauntiness and gaiety, for extremes are always
easy. It is the <i>juste-milieu</i> which it is so difficult to
attain.</p>

<p>"I am afraid I scolded you last night, Hester. I
was cross when you came back. One can't help
being cross when one has a great many things to say
and no audience," she said with a laugh.</p>

<p>"I am very sorry, mamma. I did not mean to
stay so late."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_172" id="Page_172">[Pg 172]</a></span></p>

<p>"Oh, it was nothing, my dear. I had Harry. He
sat with me a long time. He is&mdash;really&mdash;very&mdash;entertaining
when you have him to yourself."</p>

<p>"Is he?" said Hester demurely. "I should not
have expected that: but I am very glad, mother,
for your sake."</p>

<p>"Because I am likely to see a great deal of him
in the future? Oh yes, my dear. I hope so, at
least. He is very kind to me. Nobody has spoken
so nicely of me for many a year."</p>

<p>"I like him for that," said Hester honestly, yet
with a blush of self-consciousness; for perhaps
though she liked him for it, it did not improve
her opinion of Harry's intellect, that he should
find her mother's company so congenial.</p>

<p>"Oh, you would if you knew him better, Hester.
He feels for me in my changed circumstances. You
don't know how different things used to be, what a
great deal people used to think of me when I was
young. I don't complain, for perhaps it was silly of
them; but it is a great change. But living where
he does in my house, you know, Harry feels that: he
says it is there I ought to be&mdash;in the White House.
Even though nothing should ever come of it, it is
nice that somebody should think so."</p>

<p>"Unfortunately nothing can ever come of it," said
Hester. "However nice people may be they do not
give up their house to you, or their living; for you
would need his money as well, to be able to live in
the White House."</p>

<p>"You say unfortunately, dear," said her mother,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_173" id="Page_173">[Pg 173]</a></span>
with eagerness. Mrs. John blushed like a girl as
she began her attempt to hint out Harry's love-tale
to her daughter. She was innocent and modest,
though she was silly. No talk about lovers, no "petty
maxims" about marriage, had ever offended Hester's
ears. Her mother blushed and trembled when
she felt herself broaching the subject to her child.
"Oh, Hester, it would be easy, very easy, to cease to
be unfortunate&mdash;if you choose, dear. All that part
of our life might fly away like a cloud&mdash;if you
choose. We might be done with poverty and dependence
and thinking of what Catherine will say
and what people will think. The White House&mdash;might
be yours if you liked, everything might be
yours. You would only have to say the word."</p>

<p>Mrs. John's eyes filled with tears. She could not
get to the end of a long speech like this without
crying; and she was so anxious, that they found
their way also into her voice.</p>

<p>"Mother!" cried Hester, opening wide her eyes.
They were very bright and clear, and when they
opened widely looked almost unnatural in their size.
She was all the more startled that she had never
been subject to any such representation before. "I
don't know what you mean," she said. "What
should we do with the White House? I think it is
a vulgar, staring place, and far too big."</p>

<p>"Don't speak so, Hester. I can't bear it. My own
married home that your poor papa took me to!"</p>

<p>"I beg your pardon, mother. I had forgotten that.
Of course taste was different in those days."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_174" id="Page_174">[Pg 174]</a></span></p>

<p>"Oh, taste! Your poor papa had beautiful taste.
There are some things there that just break my
heart&mdash;the ormolu set that everybody admired so,
and the picture of me over the mantel-piece in the
little parlour. It used to be in the drawing-room,
but you can't wonder at them changing it. The hair
was worn high then, on the top of your head, and
short sleeves. It was very becoming to me. And to
hear you call it vulgar and staring&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"It was a mistake, mamma. I did not think
what I was saying. Forgive me, mother dear!"</p>

<p>"You know I would forgive you anything," cried
Mrs. John, now fairly launched, and forgetting all
prudential restraints. "But oh, Hester, my darling,
when he speaks to you don't be hasty; think of all
that is involved. I am not going to tell you what
he wants to say&mdash;oh no, he would never forgive me.
It is he himself that must tell you that. But Hester,
oh, don't speak hastily; don't answer all in a
moment, without thinking. Often, often a girl says
what she is sorry for, not being prepared. Think,
my darling, what it would be&mdash;not only to be rich,
but to be independent&mdash;to have your own house, all
your own, and no charity&mdash;to have as much money
as you want, to be able to help the poor, and do
everything you wish, and to make me happy, so
happy, to the end of my days!"</p>

<p>It was thus that Mrs. John treated Harry's secret.
She forgot all her precautions and her conviction
that from himself only the proposal ought to come.
The dialogues she had invented, the long conversations<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_175" id="Page_175">[Pg 175]</a></span>
with Hester which she had held in imagination,
delicately, diplomatically leading up to the main possibility,
had all disappeared when the moment came.
When she began to speak she had forgotten them
altogether, and gone off impromptu without recollecting
a syllable of all that had been so painfully prepared:
and her own eloquence, if it did not affect
her daughter, affected herself beyond description: her
mouth quivered, the tears flowed out of her eyes.
Hester, who could no more bear to see her mother
cry (though she had seen that sight often enough)
than to see the tears of a child, rose from her seat,
and coming round hurriedly behind Mrs. John's
chair put her arms caressingly round her, and laid
her cheek to that wet one. She was not so entirely
unprepared but that she understood well enough
what this emotion meant, but she tried to look
as if it had a different meaning altogether. She
drew her mother's head to her breast and kissed
her.</p>

<p>"Dear mother! Is it really so bitter to you to
be dependent? and you never let me know that
you felt it."</p>

<p>"What would have been the good," said the poor
lady, "when we could do nothing? The thing was
to put the best face upon it. But now when it is
all in your power&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"It was always in my power," said Hester, with a
mixture of real earnestness and a desire to persuade
her mother that she put a different meaning
upon all that had been said; "if you had not stopped<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_176" id="Page_176">[Pg 176]</a></span>
me, mother; but I have not lost my accent, and if
you will only give your consent now&mdash;I am older,
and people will trust me with their children."</p>

<p>"Oh, Hester, do not vex me so," cried Mrs. John.
"Do you think that is what I mean? And besides,
if I were to give you leave to-morrow, Catherine, you
know, would never consent."</p>

<p>"If you will trust to me," said Hester, colouring
high, "what Catherine pleases shall not be the last
word."</p>

<p>Mrs. John wrung her hands, drawing herself out
of Hester's arms, to gaze into her face.</p>

<p>"Oh, why will you make such a mistake? It is
not <i>that</i>. I am not strong to stand out against you,
Hester, but for your own sake. And Catherine would
never let you do it. Oh, this is quite a different
thing, my dear love! Not to work like any poor
girl, but to be far above that, to have everything
that heart could desire. And all so right and so
nice, and so suitable, Hester. If your dear papa had
lived and all had gone well I could not have wished
for a better match."</p>

<p>"Match!" said the girl, colouring violently.</p>

<p>She had indeed understood well enough that
Harry was behind all her mother's anxious insinuations,
her promises and entreaties, but she had been
confident in her power to defeat Mrs. John by aid
of her own confused statements always capable of
bearing two meanings. This word "match," however,
was one upon which there could be no confusion,
and she was immediately driven to bay. She drew<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_177" id="Page_177">[Pg 177]</a></span>
herself away from the tender attitude in which she
had been standing.</p>

<p>"I never thought," she said, "that this was a thing
that could be discussed between us," with all the
unreasonable indignation of a high-handed girl, determined
to crush all attempts to influence her on
the spot.</p>

<p>But Mrs. John, though she was conscious she
could not stand against Hester, was too sure that she
was right, and too deeply convinced of the importance
of this great question to give in, as she usually
did.</p>

<p>"Oh why should it not be discussed between us?"
she said. "Is there any one so much interested as
I am? I have heard people say it was a mother's
duty. And Hester, abroad where we used to live, I
should have settled it altogether&mdash;you would never
have been consulted. I am sure I don't know that
it is not the best way."</p>

<p>"It is a way&mdash;that could never have been taken
with me," Hester said. She walked round to her
own side of the table with a very stately aspect and
sat down, and made a pretence of resuming her
breakfast, but her hand trembled with excitement
as she took up her cup. "It may be quite true what
you say, that you are interested, mother. I suppose
so. People consider a girl a piece of goods to be sold
and disposed of."</p>

<p>"Oh, Hester, have I ever thought so? I have
been wanting in my duty," cried Mrs. John. "I
have never tried to put you forward, to get you<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_178" id="Page_178">[Pg 178]</a></span>
invitations, to have you seen and admired as other
people do. You are so proud and so fanciful that I
have never dared to do it. And when there comes
one, without ever being invited, or thought of, or
supposed possible&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>It seemed to Hester that the burning blush which
she felt go all over her was capable of bursting into
flame. It was not the shy shamefacedness with
which every girl contemplates this subject on its first
introduction, but bitter and scorching shame.</p>

<p>"Invited&mdash;thought of; mother!" she cried in a
voice of girlish thunder; "is it possible that you
could ever think of scheming&mdash;match-making&mdash;for
<span class="smcap">me</span>?"</p>

<p>No capitals could represent the fervour of her
indignation. She was entirely unconscious of the
arrogance of self-opinion that was in all she said.
For <span class="smcap">me</span>. That a man should be invited into her presence
with that thought, that she should be put
forward, taken into society in order to be seen with
that view. Heaven and Earth! was it possible that
a woman should avow such possibilities and yet live?</p>

<p>"When I tell you that I never did it, Hester!
though I know it was my duty," Mrs. John cried
with tears. Never was woman punished more
unjustly. She turned like the proverbial worm at
the supreme inappropriateness of this judgment
against her, and a sudden impulse of anger sustained
the gentle little woman. "I know it was my duty,"
she cried; "for who is to care for you, to see that
you are settled in life, but me? But I was afraid to<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_179" id="Page_179">[Pg 179]</a></span>
do it. I was obliged to leave it&mdash;to Providence. I
just said to myself, it is no use. Hester would never
be guided by me. I must leave it&mdash;to Providence."</p>

<p>It did not appear that Mrs. John had much opinion
of Providence in such matters, for she announced this
with a voice of despair. Then taking courage a little,
she said with insinuating gentleness&mdash;</p>

<p>"I was just the same when I was a girl. I could
not endure to hear about settlements and things. It
was all love I thought of&mdash;my darling. I was like
you&mdash;all love."</p>

<p>"Oh, mother!" cried Hester, jumping to her feet.
This was more intolerable than the other. Her face
flamed anew with the suggestion that it was "all
love." "For Heaven's sake don't say any more about
it, unless you want to drive me out of my senses,"
she said.</p>

<p>Mrs. John stopped crying, she was so astonished,
and gazed with open mouth and eyes. She had
thought this last tender touch would be irresistible,
that the child would fall into her arms, and perhaps
breathe forth the sweetest secret aspiration of her
heart&mdash;perhaps own to her that dark eyes and a
moustache had been her dream instead of Harry's
fairness; or that a melting voice or a genius for
poetry were absolute requirements of her hero. With
all these fancies she would have so tenderly sympathised.
She would have liked to discuss everything,
to point out that after all a fair complexion was very
nice, and a genius for poetry not profitable. She
remembered what occupation and delight these same<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_180" id="Page_180">[Pg 180]</a></span>
subjects had afforded herself in the interval before
John Vernon had proposed to her. She herself had
dreamed of a troubadour, a lonely being with a
guitar, with long hair and misfortunes; and John
Vernon had none of these attractions. She was
talked over by her mother and sister and made to
see that the Bank and the White House were far
better. Hester, perhaps, would have been more
difficult, but yet she had felt that, confidence once
established, the sweetness of these discussions would
have been unspeakable. When she had got over
her astonishment, she sank back in a despair which
was not unmingled with resentment. Had it come to
that, that nothing a mother could say would please a
child nowadays&mdash;neither the attraction of a great
match nor the tenderness of love?</p>

<p>This was how the great question of a young woman's
life was first revealed to Hester. It was not, to be
sure, the last word. That would come when she was
placed face to face with the aspirant for her favour
and have to decide, so to speak, upon the future of
two lives. But to say "no" to Harry would not have
excited and confused her being, like this previous
encounter with all the other powers and influences
which were concerned&mdash;or which were considered to
be concerned, in her fate.</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_181" id="Page_181">[Pg 181]</a></span></p>




<h2><a name="CHAPTER_XII" id="CHAPTER_XII">CHAPTER XII.</a></h2>

<h3>AN INDIGNANT SPECTATOR.</h3>


<p>Hester Vernon had been, during the most important
years of her existence, a sort of outlaw from
life. She had been unacquainted altogether with
its course and natural order, out of all its usual
habits, separated from every social way of thinking
or discipline of mind. She belonged to a little
community which thought a great deal of itself,
yet had no foundation for so doing; but, strangely
enough, though she saw through the fallacy of its
general pretensions, she yet kept its tradition in
her own person and held her head above the ordinary
world in unconscious imitation of the neighbours
whom she knew to have no right to do so. She
kept the spirit of the Vernons, though she scorned
them, and thought them a miserable collection
of ungrateful dependents and genteel beggars, less
honourable than the real beggars, who said "thank
you" at least. And she had no way of correcting
the unfortunate estimate of the world she had<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_182" id="Page_182">[Pg 182]</a></span>
formed from this group, except through the means
of Catherine Vernon, and the society in her house,
of which, at long intervals, and on a doubtful footing
which set all her pride in arms and brought out every
resentful faculty, she and her mother formed a part.
If the Vernon-Ridgways and Mr. Mildmay Vernon
were bitterly critical of Catherine, missing no opportunity
to snarl at the hand that fed them, Catherine,
on her part, was so entirely undeceived in respect
to them, and treated them with such a cynical
indulgence and smiling contempt, as if nothing save
ingratitude and malice were to be expected from
humanity, that Hester had found no relief on that
side from her painful thoughts. She was so conscious
in her own person of meanings more high,
and impulses more noble, that the scorn with which
she contemplated the people about her was almost
inevitable. And when, deeply against her will, and
always with an uneasy consciousness that her mother's
pleasure in the invitations, and excitement about
going, was childish and undignified, Hester found
herself in a corner of the Grange drawing-room, her
pride, her scornful indignation and high contempt of
society, grew and increased. Her poor little mother
standing patiently smiling at all who would smile at
her, pleased with the little recognition given her as
"one of the poor ladies at the Vernonry," and quite
content to remain there for hours for the sake of two
minutes' <i>banal</i> conversation now and then, to be
overlooked at supper, and taken compassion upon by
a disengaged curate, or picked up by some man who<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_183" id="Page_183">[Pg 183]</a></span>
had already brought back a more important guest,
made Hester furious and miserable by her complacency.
Hester herself was one of some half
dozen girls in white muslin, who kept a wistful eye
upon the curate in the hope of being taken away to
the supper-room down stairs, from which such a
sound of talk and laughter came up to the forlorn
ones left above. But no curate, however urgent, ever
persuaded Hester to go down, to stand at the tail of
the company and consume the good things on
Catherine's table. She saw it all from that point of
view which takes the glitter off the brightest surface.
Why did those poor girls in white muslin, not being
compelled, like Hester, continue to go? There were
two sisters, who would chatter together, pretending
to be very merry, and point out to each other the
pictures, or some new piece of furniture, and say that
Miss Vernon had such taste. They were always of
the number of those who were forgotten at supper,
who were sent down after the others came up stairs
with careless little apologies. Why did they come?
But Hester was not of a temper to chatter or to look
at the pictures, or to make the best of the occasion.
She stood in the corner behind her mother, and made
it quite clear that she was not "enjoying herself."
She took no interest in the pieces that were performed
on the piano, or the songs that were sung,
and even rejected the overtures of her companions in
misfortune to point out to her the "very interesting
photographs" which covered one table. Some of
the elder ladies who talked to her mother made<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_184" id="Page_184">[Pg 184]</a></span>
matters worse by compassionately remarking that
"the poor girl" was evidently "terribly shy." But,
otherwise, nobody took any notice of Hester; the
other people met each other at other houses, had
some part in the other amusements which were going
on, and knew what to say to each other. But Hester
did not know what to say. Edward Vernon, her
early acquaintance, whom she would still often meet
in the morning, and between whom and Hester
there existed a sort of half-and-half alliance unlike
her relations with any one else, took no open notice
of her; but would sometimes cast a glance at her as
he passed, confidential and secret. "How are you
getting on?" he would say; and when Hester
answered "Not at all," would shrug his shoulders
and elevate his eyebrows and say "Nor I" under
his breath. But if he did not "get on," his manner
of non-enjoyment was, at least, very different from
Hester's. He was, as it were, Catherine Vernon's
son and representative. He was the temporary
master of the house. Everybody smiled upon him,
deferred to him, consulted his wishes. Thus, even
Edward, though she regarded him with different
eyes from the others, helped to give a greater
certainty to Hester's opinion on the subject of
Society. Even he was false here&mdash;pretending to
dislike what he had no reason to dislike, and, what
was perhaps worse, leaving her to stand there neglected,
whom he was willing enough to talk with
when he found her alone.</p>

<p>Hester felt&mdash;with her head raised, her nostrils<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_185" id="Page_185">[Pg 185]</a></span>
expanded, a quiver of high indignation in her lip&mdash;that
she herself would never suffer any one to stand
thus neglected in any room of hers. Those women
in their diamonds, who swept down stairs while her
mother stood and looked on wistfully, should not be
the first in her house. She would not laugh and say
"One of the Vernonry," as Catherine permitted
herself to do. It seemed to Hester that the poor
and the small would be the first whom she would
think of, and amuse and make happy. They should
have the best of everything, they who had not the
best of anything in life. Society (she thought, always
in that corner, where there was full time to make
theories, and the keen prick of present humiliation
to give animation to them) should be a fine compensation
to those who were not so happy as the
others. A true hostess should lay herself out to
make up to them, for that one genial moment, for
the absence of beauty and brightness in their lives.
It should be all for them&mdash;the music, and the wit,
and the happy discourse. Those who lived in fine
houses, who had everything that wealth could give,
should stand aside and give place to the less happy.
There should be no one neglected. The girl whom
no one noticed stood apart and invented her high
magnanimous court, where there should be no respect
of persons. But it was not wonderful if in this real
one she felt herself standing upon a pedestal, and
looked out with scorn upon the people who were
"enjoying themselves," and with a sense of bitter mortification
watched her poor little mother curtseying<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_186" id="Page_186">[Pg 186]</a></span>
and smiling, pleased to go down to supper after the
fine people were satisfied, on somebody's benevolent
arm who was doing duty for the second time.
"No, I thank you," Hester said to the curate, who
stood offering his arm, tossing her head like a young
princess. "I never go to supper." She was not
without a consciousness either, that Catherine, hearing
this, had been mightily amused by her airs and
her indignation, and next time looked out for them
as one of the humours of the night.</p>

<p>Thus it will be seen that all Hester's small experience
of society taught her to despise it. She was
outside of the life of families, and knew little or
nothing of the ordinary relations of parents and
children, and of that self-sustaining life where there
are no painful bonds of obligation, no dependence,
no forced submission of one set of people to another.
She thought the mass was all the same, with such
exceptions as old Captain Morgan and his wife
rarely appearing, and here and there a visionary,
indignant soul such as herself, free as yet from all
bonds, looking on with proud consciousness that were
power in her hands it should not be so. The great
question of love had scarcely flitted at all across her
firmament. She had indeed a trembling sense of
possibility such as youth itself could not be youth if
destitute of, a feeling that some time suddenly there
might come down upon her path out of the skies, or
appear out of the distance, some one&mdash;in whom all
the excellences of earth should be realised; but this,
it need not be said, was as entirely unlike an ideal<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_187" id="Page_187">[Pg 187]</a></span>
preference for dark eyes and moustaches, as it was
unlike the orthodox satisfaction in a good match
which her mother had so abruptly revealed. It was
like the dawn upon the horizon where as yet there is
no sun and no colour, a visionary, tremulous premonition
of the possible day. A girl who has this
feeling in her heart is not only horrified but angry,
when the fact comes down upon her in the shape of
a dull man's proposal or a parent's recommendation.
It is a wrong to herself and to him, and to the new
earth and the new heaven which might be coming.
Hester left her mother on that memorable morning
with the glow of a fiery resentment in her heart.
Everything seemed to grow vulgar under that touch,
even things which were heavenly. Not a magnanimous
hero, but Harry&mdash;not a revelation out of
heaven, out of the unknown, but a calculation of
his good qualities and the comforts he could bestow.
All this no doubt was very highflown and absurd,
but the girl knew no better. She felt it an insult to
her, that her mother should have set such a bargain
before her&mdash;and oh, worse than an insult, intolerable!
when poor Mrs. John, in her ignorance, invited the
confidence of this high visionary maiden on the
subject of love. This drove the girl away, incapable
of supporting such profanation and blasphemy. She
went out upon the Common, where she could be
quite alone, and spent an hour or two by herself
beyond reach of anybody, trying to shake off the
impression. She had nothing to do to occupy her
mind, to force out of it an unpleasant subject. She<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_188" id="Page_188">[Pg 188]</a></span>
could only rush out and secure for herself solitude at
least, that she might master it and get it under
her feet.</p>

<p>But sometimes to appoint a meeting with yourself
to discuss such a question, ends in another way from
that which has been foreseen. Sitting alone under a
bush of whins, some chance touch of fancy made
Hester think of her mother's aspirations towards the
White House, the ormolu set, and the portrait in
short sleeves. Thoughts arise sometimes in a curious
dramatic order, to all appearance independent of the
mind of the thinker, as if certain pictures were
presented to it by some independent agency outside.
In this way there gleamed across the mind of Hester
a sudden presentation of her mother in those same
short sleeves, her pretty dark hair in two large bows
on the top of her head, her feet in white satin shoes
with sandals, like an artless beauty out of the
<i>Keepsake</i> or the <i>Forget-me-not</i>. The imagination was
so sudden that in the midst of thoughts so different
it tempted the girl to a smile. Poor mother, so young
and pretty&mdash;and silly, perhaps! And then Hester
recollected old Mr. Rule's story, how she had rushed
to her desk and produced twenty pounds to save the
bank from bankruptcy. The girl recollected, with an
indignant pang of compassion, that Catherine had
produced thousands of pounds, and <i>had</i> saved the
bank. What virtue was that in her? She had the
money whilst the other had not, and Mrs. John's
helpless generosity was just as great. Poor little
mother! and the house she was so proud of, her<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_189" id="Page_189">[Pg 189]</a></span>
"married home," her ideal of everything that was fine
and handsome. Hester's imagination after this made
a jump, and beheld her mother in the widow's dress
of black which she never left off, standing, glad of
any crumbs of notice which might fall to her in the
corner of the drawing-room where Catherine the
successful reigned supreme. It angered the girl that
her mother should be so humble-minded&mdash;but yet it
was quite characteristic of her. And what a contrast
was in those two scenes! Who made her think of
this at the very moment when, rushing out to escape
from her mother, she had felt the gulf of incomprehension
between them more bitterly than ever before?
It could not be anything but a kind influence that
did it, a good fairy, or even perhaps a friendly angel,
grieved at the emancipation of this child from the
tenderest bonds of nature. Anyhow Hester thought,
with a sudden moistening of her eyelids, of the
pretty creature in the picture and the widow in the
black gown at the same moment. From white satin
to crape, from twenty to fifty&mdash;ah, and more than
these, from the thoughtless prosperity of a creature
who had never known anything different, to the
humiliation borne so sweetly of the too-submissive
artless soul. Her eyelids moistened, and the sun
caught them, and amused himself making tiny
rainbows in the long lashes. Hester's heart too was
caught and touched. Poor <i>petite m&egrave;re</i>! how much, as
she would have said herself, she had "gone through!"</p>

<p>And then something occurred to Hester which
made her set her white teeth and clench her hands.<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_190" id="Page_190">[Pg 190]</a></span>
If she pleased she could set that right again which
was so wrong. She could put back her mother in
the White House she loved, take down the innocent
portrait in white satin, and hang it in the place of
honour once more; throw open finer rooms than
Catherine's for the reception of, oh! so different a
company&mdash;society in which no one should be overlooked,
and in which Catherine's gentle rival should
be supreme. She could do all this if she chose. The
thought suddenly bursting upon her made her head
go round. She could put her mother in the place
from which it seemed (wrongly, but yet that was so
natural an impression) Catherine had driven her,
turn the tables altogether upon Catherine, and make
a new centre, a new head, everything new. The girl
raised her head with a little shake and toss like a
high-bred horse, as this strange and sudden suggestion
came into her mind like an arrow. She could do it
all. The suggestion that she could do it when it
came from her mother had been an insult and
wrong; but when it came as it did now, though
there was horror in it, there was also temptation, the
sharp sting of an impulse. What was the dreadful
drawback? Nothing but Harry: no monster, nothing
terrible, a good fellow, a docile mind&mdash;one who had
never been unkind. Hester had judged him with
his sister for a long time, but of late days she had
learned to separate Harry from Ellen. He had always
been <i>nice</i>, as Mrs. John said&mdash;not great indeed or
noble, but honest and kind in his simple way. Once
at least (Hester remembered) he had&mdash;what was<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_191" id="Page_191">[Pg 191]</a></span>
nothing less than heroic in the circumstances&mdash;stepped
forward, broken all the Redborough laws of
precedence, and "taken down" her mother at one of
the Grange parties, in entire indifference to the fact
that ladies more great were waiting for his arm.
This recollection jumped suddenly into her mind as
she sat in the solitude thinking it all over. He had
always done his best, coming to her, standing by her
side, with not much to say indeed, but with a sort of
silent championship which Hester had laughed at,
but which she remembered now. He was not very
often present at the Grange parties; but when he
was there, this was what he had done. It was no
great matter, but in the excited state of her mind it
told upon her. Edward came only by moments when
the company was otherwise engaged, and then spoke
to her rather by signs, by that shrug of the shoulders
and elevation of the eyebrows, than in words. But
Harry had penetrated to her corner and stood by her,
making himself rather larger than usual that everybody
might see him. The ungrateful girl had laughed,
and had not been proud of her large-limbed champion;
but when she thought of it now her heart melted to
him. <i>He</i> had not been afraid of what people would
say. And after all, to be able to set everything
right, to restore her mother's comfort and exaltation,
to be free and rich, with no greater drawback than
Harry, would that be so difficult to bear? She
shivered at the thought; but yet, that she did so
much as ask herself this question showed how far
already her thoughts had gone.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_192" id="Page_192">[Pg 192]</a></span></p>

<p>After the untoward conversation of this morning,
Mrs. John took great pains to keep Harry back. She
ventured even to write a note to him, composed in
great anxiety, very much underlined and emphatic.
"I have sounded her, and find her mind <i>a complete
blank</i> on that subject. She has never thought about
it, and <i>she has seen no one</i>, as you remarked. If you
will but put off a little, I feel sure it will be followed
by <span class="smcap">the happiest results</span>." Circumstances, as it
happened, served Mrs. John's purpose, and made it
indispensable to put off a little any formal advances.
For Harry had to leave Redborough on business for
a week or two. His consequent absence from the
Vernonry was seen with great satisfaction by the
neighbours, who knew no reason for that absence.</p>

<p>"He has seen his mistake in time," the Miss
Vernon-Ridgways said, congratulating each other,
as if the destruction of poor Hester's supposed hopes
and projects was some gain to them; and Mr. Mildmay
Vernon nodded his head over his newspaper,
and chuckled and announced that Harry was no fool.
They all remarked with much particularity to Mrs. John
that her visitor had not long continued his assiduities.</p>

<p>"But we can't expect, you know, that a young
man should always be coming out here," said Miss
Matilda. "What was there to gain by it? and that
is the rule nowadays. Besides, dear Catherine
does not like these nephews of hers, as she calls
them&mdash;no more nephews than I am!&mdash;to see too
much of <i>us</i>. They might hear things which she
wouldn't wish them to hear."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_193" id="Page_193">[Pg 193]</a></span></p>

<p>Mr. Mildmay's remark was jaunty like himself.
"So Harry has given you up! Young dog, it's
what they all do, you know. He loves and he rides
away. I was no better myself, I suppose."</p>

<p>Mrs. John could have cried with humiliation and
pain. She explained that Mr. Harry was absent;
that he had told her he was going away; but these
kind people laughed in her face. Perhaps this too
had a certain effect upon Hester's mind. She heard
the laugh, though her mother did all she could to
keep her from hearing; and an impulse to show
them her power&mdash;to prove once for all that she could
have everything they prized, the money, and the
finery, and the "position," which they all envied and
sneered at, when she pleased&mdash;an impulse less noble,
but also keener than the previous one, came suddenly
into her mind. When Harry came back, however,
Hester quailed at the thought of the possibility
which she had not rejected. She saw him coming,
and stole out the other way, round the pond and
under the pine-trees, so as to be able to reach the
house of the Morgans without being seen. And
when Harry appeared he had to run the gauntlet
of the three bitter spectators, the chorus of the little
drama, without seeing its heroine.</p>

<p>"Dear Harry, back again!" the Miss Vernon-Ridgways
cried; "how nice of you to come again.
We made up our minds you had given us up. It
was so natural that you should tire of us, a set of
shabby people. And dear Catherine is so fond of
you; she likes to keep you to herself."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_194" id="Page_194">[Pg 194]</a></span></p>

<p>"I don't know that she's so fond of me. I've
been in town on business," Harry said, eager to
escape from them.</p>

<p>Mr. Mildmay patted him on the shoulder with his
newspaper. "Keep your free will, my boy," he said;
"don't give in to habits. Come when you please,
and go when you please&mdash;that's a man's rule."</p>

<p>Harry looked at this feeble Mephistopheles as if
he would have liked to kick him, but of course he
did not; because he was feeble and old, and "a cad,"
as the young man said in his heart; and so went in
by the verandah door to see Hester, and found her
not, which was hard, after what he had gone through.
Mrs. John pinned him down for a talk, which she
was nervously anxious for, and which he, after the
first moment, liked well enough too; and perhaps it
was as well, he consented to think, that he should
see how the land lay.</p>

<p>Meanwhile, Hester very cautiously had crept into
the house of the old people next door. The two
houses were divided only by a partition, yet how
different the atmosphere was! The keen inquisitions
of the Vernonry, its hungry impatience to
know and see everything, its satirical comments, its
inventions of evil motives, were all unknown here.
And even her mother's anxieties for her own advancement
put a weary element into life, which in
the peaceful parlour of the old captain and his wife
existed no more than any other agitation. The old
lady seated in the window, putting down her book well
pleased when the visitor came in, was an embodiment<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_195" id="Page_195">[Pg 195]</a></span>
of tranquillity. She had lived no easy life; she
had known many troubles and sorrows, laboured
hard and suffered much; but all that was over.
Her busy hands were still, her heart at rest. Hester
did not know sometimes what this great tranquillity
meant, whether it was the mere quiet of age, almost
mechanical, a blank of feeling, or if it was the calm
after great storms, the power of religious consolation
and faith. It filled her sometimes with a little awe&mdash;sometimes
with a sort of horror. To think that
she, with all the blood dancing in her veins, should
ever come to be like that! And yet even in her
small round she had seen enough to be sure that
these old people had a kind of happiness in their
quiet which few knew. Mrs. Morgan took off her
spectacles, and closed them within the book she had
been reading, well pleased when Hester appeared.
The captain had gone out; she was alone; and
perhaps she did not care very much for her book.
At all events, Hester was her favourite, and the
sight of the girl's bright looks and her youth,
her big eyes always full of wonder, her hair
that would scarcely keep straight, the "something
springy in her gait," pleased the old lady and did
her good.</p>

<p>"May I stay and talk to you?" Hester said.</p>

<p>"You shall stay, dear, certainly, if you think it
right; but I see everything from my window, and
Harry Vernon has just gone in to see your mother.
Do you know?"</p>

<p>"I saw him coming," Hester said, with a cloud<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_196" id="Page_196">[Pg 196]</a></span>
upon her face, which looked like displeasure, but was
indeed the trouble of her self-discussion and doubt as
to what she should do.</p>

<p>"Something is wrong," said the old lady, "and you
have come to tell me. Are you going to marry Harry
Vernon, Hester?"</p>

<p>"Would that be something wrong?" cried the
girl, looking up quickly, with a certain irritation.
She did not mean to have so important a question
fore-judged in this easy way.</p>

<p>"That is according as you feel, my dear; but I
fear he is not good enough for you. Catherine
says&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>Now the Morgans were altogether of Catherine's
faction, being her relations, and not&mdash;as the other
members of the community remembered with much
resentment&mdash;Vernons at all. It was a sinful use of
the family property as concentrated in Catherine's
hand, to support these old people who had no right
to it. More or less this was the sentiment of the
community generally, even, it is to be feared, of Mrs.
John herself; and consequently, as an almost
infallible result, they were on Catherine's side, and
took her opinions. Hester stopped the mouth of the
old lady, so to speak, hastily holding up her hand.</p>

<p>"That is a mistake," she cried; "Catherine is
quite wrong! She does not like him; but he is
honest as the skies&mdash;he is good. You must not
think badly of him because Catherine has a
prejudice against him."</p>

<p>"That is a rash thing for you to say. Catherine is<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_197" id="Page_197">[Pg 197]</a></span>
a great deal older, and a great deal wiser than
you."</p>

<p>"She may be older, and she may be wiser; but
she does not know everything," said Hester. "There
is one prejudice of hers you don't share&mdash;she thinks
the same of me."</p>

<p>This staggered the old lady.</p>

<p>"It is true&mdash;she does not understand you somehow;
things seem to go the wrong way between
times."</p>

<p>"Am I difficult to understand?" cried Hester. "I
am only nineteen, and Catherine is sixty&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"You are not quite so easy as A B C," said Mrs.
Morgan, with a smile; "still I acknowledge that is
one thing against her judgment. But you do not
answer my question. Are you going to marry Harry
Vernon?"</p>

<p>Hester, seated in the shelter of the curtain, invisible
from outside, hardly visible within, looked out
across the Common to the place where she had sat
and pondered, and breathed a half-articulate "No."</p>

<p>"Then, Hester, you should tell him so," said the
old lady. "You should not keep him hanging on.
Show a little respect, my dear, to the man who has
shown so much respect to you."</p>

<p>"Do you call that respect?" said Hester, and then
she added, lowering her voice, "My mother wishes it.
She thinks it would make her quite happy. She says
that she would want nothing more."</p>

<p>"Ah!" said the old lady, "that means&mdash;&mdash;" It
is to be feared that she was going to say something<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_198" id="Page_198">[Pg 198]</a></span>
not very respectful to Hester's mother, about whom,
also, Catherine's prejudice told: but she checked
herself in time. "That gives it another aspect," she
said.</p>

<p>"Do you think it would be right to marry a man
only because your mother wished it?" asked Hester,
fixing her eyes on Mrs. Morgan's face.</p>

<p>"Sometimes," said the old lady, with a smile.</p>

<p>"Sometimes! I thought you were like the
captain, and believed in love."</p>

<p>"Sometimes," she said again. "It does not do in
every case: that is what I object to the captain and
you for. You are always so absolute. Love rejects
suitableness; and if Catherine is not quite wrong&mdash;"</p>

<p>"She is quite wrong!" cried Hester again,
vehemently. "She does not know Harry any more
than she knows me. He is not clever, but he is
true."</p>

<p>"Then marry him, my dear."</p>

<p>"Why should I marry him?&mdash;one does not marry
every one whom Catherine misjudges&mdash;oh, there
would be too many!&mdash;nor even to please mother."</p>

<p>"I am perhaps as poor a judge as Catherine,
Hester."</p>

<p>"Now you are unjust&mdash;now you are unkind!"
cried the girl, with anger in her eyes.</p>

<p>"Come," said Mrs. Morgan, "you must not assault
me. You are so young and so fierce: and my old
man is not here to take my part."</p>

<p>"I cannot ask him, because he is a man," said
Hester; "but I know what he would say. He would<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_199" id="Page_199">[Pg 199]</a></span>
not say 'Sometimes' like you; he would say
'Never!' And that is what I think too."</p>

<p>"Because you are so young, my dear; and my
old man, bless him, he is very young. But this
world is a very strange place. Right and wrong,
are like black and white; they are distinct and
easy. The things that baffle us are those that
perhaps are not quite right, but certainly are not
wrong."</p>

<p>"Do you call it not wrong&mdash;to do what your heart
revolts at to please your mother?"</p>

<p>"I call that right in one sense; but I would not
use such strong language, Hester," the old lady
said.</p>

<p>"This must be metaphysics," said the girl.
"Sophistry, isn't it? casuistry, I don't know what
to call it; but I see through you. It would be
right to do a great many things to please her, to
make my dress her way instead of mine, to stop
at home when she wanted me though I should like
to go out; but not&mdash;surely not, Mrs. Morgan&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"To marry the man of her choice, though he is
not your own?"</p>

<p>Hester nodded her head, her face glowing with the
sudden blush that went and came in a moment. She
was agitated though she did not wish to show it.
The impulse to do it became suffocating, the shiver
of repugnance stronger as she felt that the danger
was coming near.</p>

<p>"I am not so sure," said the old lady in her
passionless calm. "Sometimes such a venture turns<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_200" id="Page_200">[Pg 200]</a></span>
out very well; to please your mother is a very
good thing in itself, and if you are right about his
character, and care for no one else, and can do it&mdash;for
after all that is the great thing, my dear&mdash;<i>if
you can do it</i>&mdash;it might turn out very well, better
than if you took your own way."</p>

<p>"Is that all that is to be thought of, whether
it will turn out well?" cried Hester, indignantly.
"You mean if it is successful; but the best way is
not always successful."</p>

<p>"Success in marriage means almost everything,"
the old lady said.</p>

<p>Then there was a pause. Separated only by the
partition, Harry Vernon was discoursing with Mrs.
John on the same subject. He was telling her all
he would do for his wife when he got her. The
White House should be refurnished; but if she
pleased the best of the old things, "the ormolu and
all that rubbish," Harry said, which gave the poor
lady a wound in spite of her great and happy
emotion, should be put into the rooms which were
to be her rooms for life; but for Hester he would
have everything new. And he thought he saw his
way to a carriage: for the phaeton, though Ellen
was fond of it, was not quite the thing, he allowed,
for a lady. He had got just about that length, and
was going on, a little excited by his own anticipations,
and filling his future mother-in-law with
delight and happiness, when Hester, on the other
side of the wall, suddenly sprang up and cried,
throwing up her hands&mdash;</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_201" id="Page_201">[Pg 201]</a></span></p>

<p>"But I cannot do it!" in tones so painful and so
clear that it was a wonder they did not penetrate
the wainscotting.</p>

<p>Mrs. Morgan, who had been waiting for a reply,
folded her old fingers&mdash;worn with the hard usage
of life, but now so quiet&mdash;into each other, and
said, softly&mdash;</p>

<p>"That was what I thought."</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_202" id="Page_202">[Pg 202]</a></span></p>




<h2><a name="CHAPTER_XIII" id="CHAPTER_XIII">CHAPTER XIII.</a></h2>

<h3>CATHERINE'S OPINION.</h3>


<p>It is not to be supposed that Harry's visits, which
made so much commotion at the Vernonry, could
have entirely escaped the keen observation of the
Grange. Catherine Vernon shared, with most sovereigns
and the ruling class in general, the peculiarity,
not indeed a very unusual one, of liking to know
everything that went on within her sphere. It was
not as gossip, nor, she would have said with some
reason, from curiosity alone. She had for so long
been all-powerful, and sure that the means were in
her hand to help those that wanted help, and to
regulate affairs in general for the benefit of the
world, that it had become a necessity, almost a duty
on her part, to keep herself informed of everything
that went on. When an individual feels capable of
performing the part of a visible Providence, it
becomes incumbent upon that person, so far as
possible, to know everything, to shut his eyes to no
detail, to note every little incident, and to encourage<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_203" id="Page_203">[Pg 203]</a></span>
not only the confidences of his possible clients and
<i>prot&eacute;g&eacute;s</i>, but the observations of all surrounding them,
and every hint as to their motives, their intentions
and purposes, that can be got at. The outside crowd,
knowing nothing of the meaning of these investigations,
is apt to mistake them altogether; but
Catherine did not care much about the outside world.
It was her wish that everything should be told her,
and she was perhaps too apt to think that those who
were not willing or able to open their hearts, were
people who had secrets in their life, and probably a
good deal that would not bear the light. She liked
her friends to bring her news, and never thought
anything too trivial to be added to the mass of
information which was in her hands. She knew the
habits of her neighbours, and the good and evil
fortune that befell them, better sometimes than they
did themselves. Parents, who were doubtful about
the proceedings of their sons, had they asked
Catherine, would have known all about them. So
the prince, in a little State, may often interest
himself graciously about the affairs of his subjects,
and monarchs are the best of genealogists, knowing
who married who all the world over, even outside of
the Almanach de Gotha. It is not a taste which can
be indulged without falling into an occasional appearance
of pettiness; but yet there is a great deal to be
said for this degree of interest in our fellow creatures,
and there is no way in which it can be kept up so
well as in a country town, where everybody knows
everybody else. This is perhaps rather an elaborate<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_204" id="Page_204">[Pg 204]</a></span>
preface to introduce the simple fact that Catherine
Vernon from the very beginning had known of
Harry's visit to the Vernonry. Her own woman,
Meredith by name, shared her mistress's task, without
Catherine's fine reason for it, and carried it deeper
than Catherine, not refusing any garbage of the lanes
to satisfy her appetite. And she was a woman who
saw everything and knew everybody. It was no
more than Harry's second or third visit when she
pointed him out to her mistress, walking past in his
summer morning suit, which the long evenings
permitted a young man to retain while daylight
lasted and he could be about. Harry was very
carefully got up; he wore light clothes, and ties
of the most interesting description. He had always
the stick which was in fashion, the hat of the
moment; and a very pleasant sight he was striding
along in the summer evening, going where love
carried him, with honest intentions and a simple
heart. He was not perhaps capable of a very refined
or poetical sentiment. He had at that time no doubt
whatever that Hester would accept him gratefully,
not so much for himself (in which point he had an
instinctive humility), but for the good things he
could give her. The glamour and the thousand little
enchantments of love were not in him, but he was
honest and true, as Hester had said. He meant this
poor girl, whom most people, in Catherine's drawing-room
and elsewhere, passed by without notice, though
some thought her pretty&mdash;he meant her as his wife
to be a happy and much-honoured woman. And<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_205" id="Page_205">[Pg 205]</a></span>
what was more, he meant to be good to his mother-in-law.
He might have been a romantic paladin, or
a man of genius, and not have been so excellent, so
worthy of all admiration as that. It never occurred
to Harry to go another way, to conceal what he was
about from prying eyes. He was not ashamed of
what he was about. All the world might watch his
steps so far as he cared, and it must have required a
distinct effort on the part of any honest heart not to
like the sight of him as he went a-wooing, and wish
him a happy ending. Perhaps it would be too much
to say that Catherine made that effort; but she was
not favourable to Harry as to his cousin who was
under her own roof.</p>

<p>It is scarcely possible for any eyes but those of a
parent (and even the eyes of a parent are not always
impartial) to look upon two young candidates for
favour with exactly the same sentiments. If it is
too much to say that one will be loved and the other
hated, at least the balance will be unequal. Edward
had found means from the beginning to please his
patroness and relative. He had been&mdash;is not this
the grand reason?&mdash;so good: he had been ready at
her service when she wanted him, he had stayed at
home, he had been son and daughter to the lonely
woman. All that she knew of him was excellent,
and she had no reason to imagine there was anything
to know which was not equally good.</p>

<p>Catherine was one of the people who say that
they do not look for gratitude. If Edward had not
appreciated the kindness which picked him up as it<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_206" id="Page_206">[Pg 206]</a></span>
were from the roadside, she would but have laughed;
she would not have shown either surprise or pain;
but the fact that he did feel her kindness, and devote
himself to her, touched her deeply. She was as well
off as if he had been her son, far better off than
many mothers with sons. But Harry was very
different. For a long time she had made up her
mind that Harry was her great failure. He and his
sister had never attempted to attach themselves to
Catherine. They had considered their elevation to
the White House, and the honours of the bank, as
owing to their own merits, and had set up a sort of
heir-apparent establishment always in opposition.
With the natural instinct of a woman, she had
concluded it all to be Ellen's fault; but Harry had
not the good sense to separate himself from his
sister, or even to imply that he did not support her
in her proceedings: far from that, he stood by her
with the utmost loyalty. Though he never was
anything but deferential and respectful in his dull
way to his benefactress, he never would allow it to be
supposed that he did not approve of his sister and
back her up. If Catherine saw the merit of this
faithfulness, it was in a grudging way; and, as a
matter of fact, she did not like Harry. There was
nothing in reality to find fault with in him. He was
very steady at his business, notwithstanding the
rival claims of cricket in summer and football in
winter. And when he was asked to dinner at the
Grange, he was as punctual as clockwork, with an
expanse of shirt front that would have been a credit<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_207" id="Page_207">[Pg 207]</a></span>
to any man. But he did not please Catherine. He
had given her a reproof which stung, on that occasion
when he "took down" Mrs. John, without waiting to
know what person of importance should have gone
before. Nothing that could have been said would
have stung Catherine so much as that good-natured
act, and it was all the more hard upon her that in
her heart (always a good and generous one) she
approved Harry. It was a reproach to her, and still
more, it was a reproach to Edward, who had never
taken the slightest notice of Mrs. John's presence,
but left her among the neglected ones. Catherine
had been doubly angry with Harry ever since that
evening. She would not allow even that he was a
handsome fellow.</p>

<p>"He is big enough," she would say, resenting the
fact that he was a head taller than Edward, and
twice as strong. "He is a fine animal, if you like:
but I don't see how a man with white eyelashes
can be considered handsome."</p>

<p>Edward did not oppose his aunt in this any more
than in other things. "I allow," he would say, "that
he is not clever." But he shook his head, as one
who would deprecate a too true accusation when
Miss Vernon held Harry up to ridicule. "No, he is
not clever; he will never set the Thames on fire,"
Edward said.</p>

<p>Miss Vernon saw Harry pass the third time he
went to the Vernonry, and afterwards she looked for
him regularly. "Who was it for?" she asked, with
an ardent feminine appreciation of the only motive<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_208" id="Page_208">[Pg 208]</a></span>
which could induce a man to hurry over his dinner
and get to the Vernonry in time for the humble
community's tea. This was a question not very hard
to answer, seeing that the next moment she added to
herself, "Who else could it be?" It could not be
Matilda, or Martha, who were neither young nor fair.
It was very unlikely to be Mrs. Reginald, though she
was young enough, and not without beauty. "But
Harry is not the man to burden himself with a lot
of children," said Catherine, with an unnecessary
scoff at the poor fellow who was not her favourite.
Thus there was only one person whom it could be.
It gave her a sort of pang of amusement when she
concluded upon this&mdash;Hester! that proud, troublesome
creature&mdash;she who would never give in, who
put on the airs of a princess in the Grange drawing-room,
and declined to go to supper&mdash;she with the
spirit of a revolutionary, and the temper of a&mdash;demon&mdash;(no,
no, this was perhaps too bad&mdash;the
temper of a&mdash;Vernon, Catherine said to herself with
a laugh)&mdash;she to fall to the lot of Harry! This was
so strangely funny, so paradoxical, so out of character,
that it amused Catherine altogether beyond description,
yet gave her a strange blow. What a ridiculous
combination! If the world had been ransacked for
two who ought not to come together, these two
would be that pair. What would they do with each
other? how could they ever pull together&mdash;the one
all eagerness and vigour, the other stolid and heavy?
Catherine was almost tempted to be sorry for the
girl, but the next moment she laughed again. Oh,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_209" id="Page_209">[Pg 209]</a></span>
it was easy to understand! Mrs. John must have
managed it all. She would see in it a way of
recovering all her lost glories, of getting back her
footing in that ridiculous White House, which had
been adapted to her silly taste from the beginning.
Oh, no doubt it was her doing! She would talk
the girl over; she would persuade her into it, "with
a host of petty maxims preaching down a daughter's
heart." And it was with a gleam of vindictive
amusement that Catherine assured herself that Mrs.
John would find herself mistaken. After she had
made the marriage she would be left in the lurch.
Harry was not a man to put up with a mother-in-law.
Thus Catherine Vernon, though she was a clever
woman, misconceived and misunderstood them all.</p>

<p>But yet it did give her a natural pang. That girl,
who compelled her attention somehow, though she
had no favour for her&mdash;who inspired her with a certain
respect, notwithstanding the consistent opposition
to herself which Hester had always shown&mdash;to
think of that ambitious creature, all fire and life
being quenched in the dulness of Harry, put out in
the heavy tranquillity of his athletic existence&mdash;to
score at cricket matches, and spend long wearisome
days out in the sun, watching for the runs he got!
But then, she would be well off, would have the
White House and all sorts of good things. Oh, no
occasion to be sorry for her. She would get her
compensation. And then Catherine thought, with a
jealous displeasure which she felt angry with herself
for entertaining, of the arrangements which Harry's<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_210" id="Page_210">[Pg 210]</a></span>
marriage would make necessary. Up to this time he
had more or less held his position at her pleasure, but
she had no reason, she was aware, to refuse to satisfy
all her engagements, and make him actually independent,
as he had been virtually for a long time back.
She would not have the slightest excuse for doing it.
Everything had gone on perfectly well. There were
no complaints of him at the bank. The business
flourished and made progress. But the thought that
Hester would be thus immediately placed on a sort
of equality with herself, and Mrs. John reinstated,
vexed her. It was a mean sentiment, but she could
not help it. It vexed her in spite of herself.</p>

<p>The news had been, it is scarcely necessary to say,
communicated to Edward at a very early stage. Miss
Vernon had called him to her, after dinner, as soon
as he came up stairs to the drawing-room, to the
window from which the road was visible winding
along the side of the Common to the Vernonry.</p>

<p>"Do you see that?" she said, pointing his cousin
out.</p>

<p>What? He saw the Common lying in all its
sweetness, its roughness and undulations standing
out in the level sunset rays, every bush casting a
shadow. He was young, and he had at least a
scientific love of nature, and longed to be out poking
into those beds of herbage, feeling the fresh air on
his face; and it was with a secret grudge in his
heart that he realised the difference between the
light, strong figure moving along buoyant with life
and liberty, and he himself in his evening clothes<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_211" id="Page_211">[Pg 211]</a></span>
in his aunt's drawing-room, seeing it all from within
four walls.</p>

<p>"What?" he said, thinking that he would rather
not see the fair out-door evening world since he could
have no share in it. "Why&mdash;is it Harry?" and
then he felt that he hated the fellow who was his
own master.</p>

<p>"He is going a-wooing," Miss Vernon said.</p>

<p>She was sitting in her favourite place which commanded
this prospect, the Common, the Vernonry,
the tall pines, and the red bars of the sunset behind.
The sunset was her favourite entertainment, and in
summer she always sat here. Edward stood behind,
looking out over her head. She did not see the
grimace with which he heard these words. And he
did not reply for some time. It gave him a shock
more sharp even than that with which Catherine
herself had heard it first, though to be sure there
was no reason why.</p>

<p>"Ah!" he said indifferently, "who can he find to
woo about here?" But he knew very well in his
heart what the answer would be.</p>

<p>"Only one person, so far as I can make out. It
must be that girl of Mrs. John's. I suppose she is
what you call pretty, though she has never been a
favourite of mine."</p>

<p>"But you can't confine prettiness to your favourites,
Aunt Catherine," said Edward, with a sharp
smile which he had sometimes.</p>

<p>"No, that's true. I deserved that you should hit
that blot. She is pretty I know. Poor Harry, he<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_212" id="Page_212">[Pg 212]</a></span>
will have his hands full, what with the mild mother
and the wild daughter. I wonder at the girl though.
She is an ambitious, energetic thing, and poor
dear Harry will never set the Thames on fire as
you say."</p>

<p>"Did I say it? No, I don't think he will; but he
has solid qualities."</p>

<p>"Very solid&mdash;the White House and his share in the
bank. Oh, there will be an equivalent! And to think
that little schemer, that soft little woman that looks
as if she could not harm a fly, should have managed
to secure herself in this cunning way and get her
daughter back to the point she started from! Who
would have thought it? There is nothing so astute
as simplicity."</p>

<p>Edward made no reply, and this was a thing Miss
Vernon did not like. She required a response.
Silence felt like disapproval, and as there was a
strong silent protest in her heart against everything
that was mean or petty in what she said,
she was apt to resent this want of acquiescence all
the more. She looked back at him when he did
not expect it, and was startled to see a look she
had never seen before, a look that astonished her,
on his face. It was something like a snarl of contempt
and despite, but it disappeared in a moment
and she could not believe her eyes.</p>

<p>"Are you so sure that Hester will marry him?"
was all that Edward said.</p>

<p>"Marry him! Why how could he have so much
as looked that way without encouragement? To be<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_213" id="Page_213">[Pg 213]</a></span>
sure she will marry him. Where could she find any
one who had so much to offer? The girl is not a fool.
Besides, her mother would not let her if she wished
it; and of course she would not wish it, an ambitious
girl to whom her present position is intolerable. Don't
you remember her look on the Thursdays, which we
both remarked?"</p>

<p>Edward had remarked it, not exactly in the same
way as Catherine had done. Hester's look had made
him ashamed of himself, but he had not had the
strength to go and display himself by her side as
Harry had done. It made him furious to think of
Harry standing there by her in the corner, not caring
what their patroness might think. It was a courage
of which he was not capable.</p>

<p>"Don't you think," he said, softly, "that we are
going too fast, Aunt Catherine, in every way?
Harry's visit may be a chance one. There may be
no purpose at all in it, or it may have some other
purpose."</p>

<p>"He was there last night and on last Saturday and
Wednesday, and I don't know how many evenings
besides. Oh no, there can be no doubt on the subject.
It will be a great amusement for the Vernonry;
the dear old ladies want something to amuse
them."</p>

<p>This was said of the Ridgways and Mr. Mildmay,
who were all younger than Catherine, and one of
them a man. But that fact increased the pleasantry
all the more.</p>

<p>The curious thing was, that through all this<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_214" id="Page_214">[Pg 214]</a></span>
Catherine was aware that what she was saying was
unworthy of her, and in reality was disgusted with
herself, and kept a mental reckoning of all the meannesses
of which she had been guilty. There were first
her remarks upon Mrs. John, which indeed might be
true enough, but which she ought not to have made;
and her certainty that scheming and "encouragement"
must have been used to entrap Harry, and
that Hester would marry him for an equivalent. No
moralist would have noted these faults more clearly
than she did herself, yet somehow she went on with
them all the same. But it vexed and annoyed her
to find Edward so constrained. He said, "Will you
come and have a turn in the garden?" but not in
his usual tone. That turn in the garden had been
doubly pleasant to her, because he had made it
appear that it was pleasant to him too.</p>

<p>"I think not to-night," she said.</p>

<p>"There is a new moon. It is a lovely evening,"
said he. "I think you ought to go. The sunset on
one side, and that clear, pale shining in the east on
the other, make such a beautiful contrast. Come,
Aunt Catherine, it will do you good."</p>

<p>"You think it will blow the ill-natured thoughts
out of my head," she said with a laugh.</p>

<p>"Have you ill-natured thoughts? I was not
aware of it," said Edward; and then as she did not
move he added&mdash;"If you will not come I think I
must go and give a little attention to some papers
I brought home with me. I had not time to look at
them during the day."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_215" id="Page_215">[Pg 215]</a></span></p>

<p>"What papers?" she said quickly.</p>

<p>"Oh, only some prospectuses and details about
investments," he said with a careless air, and left
her: to her great surprise.</p>

<p>He had been in the habit of telling her of any
work he had, all about it, and of sitting with her for
an hour or two at least. Catherine was surprised,
but as is natural in a first shock of this kind, having
got over the momentary prick of it, assured herself
that it was accidental and meant nothing: yet was
a little more vexed with <i>that</i> girl and with Harry,
because in the same way their concerns had brought
about this little, little break, this momentary lapse
in the continuance. She could not any longer amuse
herself with the prospect of the Vernonry, and the
little excitement of this dawning story. There were
a great many pricks about the story altogether,
sentiments and sensations of which, when left alone
and without the support of any moral backer up,
of Meredith's stimulating disclosures or Edward's
assent, she felt ashamed. It was wrong to speak as
she had done about the astuteness of Mrs. John's
simplicity. Why should not the mother wish to
place her child in the position which she, after all
by no fault of her own, poor creature! had lost?
Catherine escaped from the tingling of shame at her
own pettiness which had gone through her, by considering
the final arrangements which she would
have to make in view of Harry's marriage. Practically
she was always magnanimous; she would
have scorned a petty cutting off, a restraint of<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_216" id="Page_216">[Pg 216]</a></span>
liberality, a condition to her gifts. Her givings
were always large, and if her mind was warped by
the sense of benefactions unappreciated, or kindness
unprized, of reaping envy and resentment where she
should have got gratitude and love, was it not the
fault of her pensioners more than her own, the fault
of human nature, which she had been forced to
believe she saw through, and which&mdash;in order not
to break her heart over it&mdash;she was obliged to laugh
at and despise?</p>

<p>It would have given Catherine Vernon a sharper
shock still if she had seen into Edward's mind as he
went away from her, bitterly feeling that while other
men could taste the sweetness of freedom and of
love, he was attached to an old woman's apron-strings,
and had to keep her company and do her
pleasure, instead of taking the good of his youth
like the rest. It was a sudden crisis of this bitterness
which had made it impossible for him to bear
the yoke which he usually carried so patiently, and
which she, deceived in this instance, believed to be
pleasant to him, the natural impulse of a tranquil
and home-loving disposition. Had she known how
he regarded it, how violently he suppressed and
subdued himself, the shock would have been a
terrible one; for she was slow to put faith in those
around her, and she clung to the one who had been
able to impress her with a sense of trustworthiness,
with a double tenacity. Edward breathed more
freely when he got out of that drawing-room where
he always seemed so entirely at home. The library<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_217" id="Page_217">[Pg 217]</a></span>
in which he sat when he was alone was a little less
oppressive in so far that he was alone in it, but the
recollection of Harry going lightly along in his freedom,
going a-wooing, had raised a ferment in the
breast of the other which it was very difficult to
quiet down. Since the morning when he made her
acquaintance first, Hester had been an interest to
the self-sufficing young man. Perhaps it was only a
little warmer than the interest he felt in his botany,
in a new specimen, but it had continued through
all those years. When he spoke that little aside to
her at the party, with his eyebrows and shoulders
in a suppressed and confidential attitude which
placed himself and her in the same category of compelled
assistants at a lugubrious merrymaking where
neither of them "got on"&mdash;he felt her in her poor
little muslin frock and her high indignation to be
far the most interesting person in the room, and
he resented the necessity which made it impossible
to him as the official host to separate himself from
the more important people, and show the opinion he
had of her. Here again the disabilities of his good
fortune weighed upon Edward. He was the host;
he was the first person there next to Catherine,
her representative, the master of all her wealth.
Harry was not of any authority in the house; so he
could do as he pleased, and earn the gratitude of
Hester; but Edward could neither go to her side in
her corner, nor set out of a lovely evening in his
pleasantest clothes to woo her, as a free man might.
He was not sure that he wanted to woo her, any<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_218" id="Page_218">[Pg 218]</a></span>
more than as a fine specimen; but he could not
bear the impudence of the other fellow who thought
himself good enough to go after her, and whom
Catherine thought so sure to win. Edward could
not contemplate with any self-possession the idea
that Harry might win. It made him angry, it made
him furious; it made him for the moment too much
a natural man, too sincere and real to be capable of
his usual self-suppression. Harry would have an
equal share with himself of the bank; they were
equal there in power and authority, and in the
profits they drew. Why then was it that Harry
should be his own master and Edward the slave of
an old woman! This was the utterance of his
passion, of the sincerity which was forced upon him
by the enticements of the summer night, the freedom
in the air, and the sight of all the privileges
which Harry exercised so easily without knowing
they were privileges at all. No doubt the fellow
thought himself good enough for Hester, perhaps
believed that she would jump at him, and was encouraging
him, and ready to accept his proffered
hand as soon as ever he should hold it out. This
thought made Edward's blood boil, and the confinement
of the Grange became so oppressive to him
that he did not know how to bear it. He indemnified
himself by plunging into the midst of the
bundle of papers which he had not chosen to
describe to Catherine. In these papers lay far more
excitement than all Harry's privileges had yet
supplied. A battery of artillery planted in front of<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_219" id="Page_219">[Pg 219]</a></span>
this peaceful Grange with all its matches alight
would scarcely have been more full of danger.
There was enough in the packet to tear the house
up by its roots, and send its walls flying in a whirlwind
of ashes and ruin. Edward sat down to
examine it as another man might have flown to
brandy or laudanum. Dreams were in it of sudden
successes, of fortunes achieved in a moment. Castles
in the air more dazzling than ever rose in a fairy
tale. He revenged himself on his bonds, on the
superior happiness of his rival, on Catherine above
all, the unconscious cause of his imprisonment, by
this&mdash;Here was enough, all ready and in his hands,
to ruin them all.</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_220" id="Page_220">[Pg 220]</a></span></p>




<h2><a name="CHAPTER_XIV" id="CHAPTER_XIV">CHAPTER XIV.</a></h2>

<h3>HARRY'S VIEW.</h3>


<p>Of all the people who discussed his affairs and
were interested in his prosperity, Harry Vernon
himself would have agreed most entirely with
Catherine. He had no very elevated ideal either
of life in general or even of love, though that influenced
him at the present moment very powerfully.
He had got to be "very fond," as he would himself
have described it, of Hester. He thought her very
pretty to begin with, very delightful, attractive, and
amusing&mdash;the sort of girl with whom life never
would be dull. He thought her clever, one who
would be able to manage his now somewhat too
large and unwieldy house and take the trouble off
his hands; he thought that handsomely dressed, as
of course she would be, she would look very nice at
the head of his table and make it popular&mdash;better
even than Ellen had done: for in Ellen's time it had
been somewhat fast and noisy, more than Harry,
with the instincts of a respectable citizen and man of<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_221" id="Page_221">[Pg 221]</a></span>
business, felt to be advantageous, though he had
enjoyed it well enough. In all these particulars he
felt that his affections were leading him wisely, and
that not merely love&mdash;always avowedly more or less
folly&mdash;but discrimination and sense were in his
choice. But he would have thought Catherine
perfectly right about the advantages on Hester's
side, and he would not have been disgusted or
offended by the suggestion that Mrs. John had
schemed to place her daughter in the White House,
and done her best not to let such an eligible suitor
slip through her hands. And quite right too, he
would have said! He knew that he would be "a
catch" for Hester, and that as she was no fool, it
was inconceivable that she should not jump at him.
This idea did not offend him at all; that she should
marry him because he could give her rank which
otherwise she would not have, was a natural, sensible,
perfectly legitimate reason to Harry. Had there
been a rival in the field with greater things to offer,
he would have felt that he had a right to pause, to
think what was most to her advantage. But as
there was nobody, he thought probably that Hester
would be a great fool if she made any difficulty.
Catherine had offended herself and offended Edward
by her suggestion, but she would not have offended
Harry. "That is about it&mdash;that is the true state of
the case," he would have said. And it is possible that
he might have represented that notwithstanding the
fact that she had no money, Hester would not be
an altogether bad investment; for she had connections.<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_222" id="Page_222">[Pg 222]</a></span>
Mrs. John might be a silly little woman, but
she was Sir John Westwood's cousin, and a little
more backing up from the county people would do
the Vernons no harm. Thus he took a very common-sense
view of the whole concern, thinking it
perfectly reasonable that Mrs. John should scheme,
and that Hester should consider the advantages.
He thought even that she had probably calculated
the uses of holding back, and that her expeditions
with the old captain, her disappearances at the time
of his own visits, were done with a distinct intention
of drawing a fellow on. It made him very angry,
especially as matters came to a crisis, to find her
absent, and only Mrs. John, very nervous and
apologetic, waiting for him when he went in: but
after the first bitterness of the disappointment, he
was ready to allow that it was good policy, and that
he was all the more anxious in the pursuit because
she thus played with him and kept him in uncertainty.
If Hester had but known that she was
supposed to be "drawing him on" by her absences!
but fortunately she did not know. And nothing
could have made them understand each other on
that point. They belonged to two different species,
and talked different languages. But the superficial
explanation which Catherine was ashamed of herself
for giving, and which Edward despised, would have
seemed quite natural to Harry, though in many
ways he was better than they were, and far more
true to his own system of morality. He neither hid
nor deceived, he did not cheat himself nor any one<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_223" id="Page_223">[Pg 223]</a></span>
else; and truth is so precious that even a low
matter-of-fact truth is better than half a falsehood,
however delicately and cleverly carried out. Harry
was all genuine throughout, not elevated in kind,
but never pretending to be what he was not. He
liked to think that he had a great many advantages
to bestow, and that the lady of his hopes had too
much good sense not to take these advantages into
consideration. This was different from wild impulse
and passion, which some people think finer things.
But Harry did not think so; he knew nothing indeed
about them. He considered that a man (and on the
other side perhaps an heiress) might "please his
fancy," in the first place, about his wife, before
thinking of other matters: but that the girl should
weigh the advantages, and strain a point to accept a
good offer, was as clear to him as daylight. It would
not in the smallest degree have vexed him to know
that his own claims were thus reasonably weighed.
He had the proud satisfaction of thinking that
Hester was not very likely to get such another offer;
and he felt sufficient confidence in her good sense
to be sure that this must have its just influence
upon her. Why should not it weigh with her?
She was "no fool." She could not but see on
which side the advantage lay.</p>

<p>The only thing was that he got tired of waiting
for the decision. He thought it unreasonable that
having so honourably and unequivocally displayed
his intentions, he should not be allowed to carry
them out. Summer began to wane and autumn to<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_224" id="Page_224">[Pg 224]</a></span>
come on, and yet he had never been able to speak
to the object of his affections. At last his patience
failed him altogether. He announced his mind to
Mrs. John almost with solemnity. "I can't go on
much longer," he said; "the servants worry me to
death. Ellen always took that sort of thing off my
hands. But I don't want Ellen to get in her nose
again and spoil my wife's chances when she does
come. The truth is, I should like to get married
before Christmas, if I am to be married at all. Why
should Hester hold me off and on? If she won't
have me, let her say so, and I can look elsewhere.
I don't think I should have much difficulty in
finding&mdash;" he concluded, his annoyance going off
in a half-smile of vanity as he caressed his light
moustache.</p>

<p>A shiver ran through Mrs. John. Before Christmas!
Even if Hester would consent at all, was it
possible that her reluctance could be overpowered so
soon, or that she should be made to acquiesce in
Harry's quite practical and matter-of-fact view.
"No doubt you want a lady in the house," she
said, sympathetically. "I am sure if I could be of
any use&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Oh yes, of course you could be of use," said the
straightforward lover, "after we are married; but it
would be making a laughing-stock of ourselves if I
were to have you before. If there was any reason
for putting off I might wait, but I don't see any
reason. Once it's settled, we could make our
arrangements comfortably. It is being hung up<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_225" id="Page_225">[Pg 225]</a></span>
like this from week to week which is such a
nuisance to me."</p>

<p>He went away that evening almost angry. What
was to be done? Mrs. John's natural instinct was
to "talk to" Hester; but she had learned by experience
that "talking to" is not a very effectual
instrument. All that she had been able to say had
been said, but without much apparent effect. She
had pointed out all the advantages. She had shown,
with tears in her eyes, what a change it would be&mdash;what
an unspeakable, delightful difference. Insensibly
to herself, Mrs. John had become eloquent
upon the charms, if not of Harry, at least of the
White House. But this had suddenly been brought
home to her by her remorseless child, who said
calmly, "Mother, if I could marry the house and
let you have it, I would do so in a moment," which
stopped Mrs. John's mouth.</p>

<p>"Marry the&mdash;house!" she said, with a surprised
cry.</p>

<p>"It is of the house you are talking. I know it
is nice&mdash;or at least I know you like it. I do not
care for it myself."</p>

<p>"Oh, Hester, my first married home!"</p>

<p>"Yes, mother, I know. I wish I could get it for
you&mdash;on easier terms," the girl said, with a sigh.
And this was about all that ever came of talking
to her. She was very obstinate: and such a
strange girl.</p>

<p>But sometimes Providence, so much appealed
to&mdash;whom we upbraid for not furthering us and<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_226" id="Page_226">[Pg 226]</a></span>
backing up our plans&mdash;suddenly did interfere. It
was entirely by chance, as people say. Mrs. John
had gone out of the room not two minutes before,
and Hester, who had been walking and had just
come in, stood before the old-fashioned dark mirror
which occupied the space between the windows,
arranging her hair, which had been blown about
by the wind. It was, as has been said, troublesome
hair&mdash;so full of curls that the moment it had a
chance it ran out of the level and orderly into rings
and twists, which were quite unfashionable in those
days. It had been loosened out by the wind, and
she was trying to coax it back into its legitimate
bondage, with her arms raised to her head, and her
back turned to the door. Harry came in without
knocking, and the first intimation Hester had that
the long-avoided moment had come, and that there
was no escape for her, was when she saw his large
form in the glass, close to her, looming over her, his
fair head above hers, looking down with admiration
and tenderness upon her image. She turned round
hastily, with a cry of astonishment, her rebellious
locks escaping from her hands.</p>

<p>"Why shouldn't you let it stay so? It is very
pretty so," Harry said, looking at the curly mass
with a smile, as if he had a great mind to take a
lock of it in his fingers.</p>

<p>Hester sprang away from him, and twisted it up,
she did not know how.</p>

<p>"It is so untidy&mdash;there is so much wind." She
was angry with herself for apologising. It was he<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_227" id="Page_227">[Pg 227]</a></span>
who ought to have apologised. She pushed the hair
away behind her ears, and got it fastened somehow.
"I did not hear you knock," she said.</p>

<p>"I fear I didn't knock. The verandah door
was open. I saw nobody about. I did not know
whether I should find any one. You are so often
out now."</p>

<p>"Yes, I walk with old Captain Morgan about this
time. In the morning I am always at home."</p>

<p>"If I had known that I should have come in the
morning," he said, "not regularly because of the
bank, but I should have come once to see you.
However, this is far better. I am so glad to find
you. I have wished for this for months past. Has
it never occurred to you that I was anxious to see
you, Hester? You looked to me as if you were
keeping away."</p>

<p>"Why should I keep away? I do always the
same thing at the same hour. Captain Morgan is
old&mdash;he requires to have somebody with him."</p>

<p>"And I&mdash;I am young, and I want somebody
with me."</p>

<p>"Oh, it does not matter about young people,"
Hester said.</p>

<p>"I think it matters most of all, because they
have their life before them; and, don't you know,
the choice of a companion tells for so much&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"A companion!&mdash;oh, that is quite a different
question," said Hester. "It is teaching I have
always wanted, never a companion's place."</p>

<p>"I have heard of that," said Harry. "When you<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_228" id="Page_228">[Pg 228]</a></span>
were quite a little thing you wanted to teach, and
Aunt Catherine would not let you. You&mdash;teaching!
It would have been quite out of the question.
Won't you sit down? Do come for once, now that
I have found you, and sit down here."</p>

<p>It was the little old-fashioned settee that was
indicated, where there was just room for two.</p>

<p>"Oh, I have got things to do!" cried Hester,
in alarm. "My mother will be here immediately,
but I&mdash;have got something up stairs&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Always when I come," he said. "Just once,
because I am here, listen to me, Hester. It won't
take very long. I think you use me very ill. You
know I come here for you, and you will never let
me see you. And now when I find you by chance,
you insist that you have something to do. Leave
it till to-morrow. Perhaps after to-morrow," said
Harry, in a lugubrious voice, "I may not be
coming any more."</p>

<p>"Is anything to happen to-morrow?" said Hester,
betrayed by his seeming gravity.</p>

<p>Then Harry cheered up again, and became more
at his ease.</p>

<p>"Not," he said, "if something should happen
to-night. That's what I wish&mdash;that something
should happen now. Sit down, please, and listen.
Don't you know, Hester&mdash;they say women always
know&mdash;that I've been in love with you ever so
long?"</p>

<p>"No, I don't know anything about it," said
Hester, though a sudden flush came over her face.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_229" id="Page_229">[Pg 229]</a></span></p>

<p>She had seated herself on the sofa in a kind of
desperation, fearing that he meant to place himself
beside her. And such had been Harry's intention;
but some dim sense of fitness moved him to depart
from this portion of his programme. He stood
before her instead, looking down upon her, feeling
now that he had it all in his own hands.</p>

<p>"It is true, though. What do you suppose I have
been coming here for every night? I <i>think</i> I've
been in love with you ever since I first saw you&mdash;when
you were only a child. Now I'm alone since
my sister is married, and quite free to choose where
I like. He made a pause, but Hester did not say
anything. She sat drawing patterns upon the
carpet with her foot, listening&mdash;because she could
not help it. She who was so full of eagerness and
life, it seemed to Harry as if every line of her figure
expressed the listlessness of a subject that wearied
her. Now this was more than a fellow could stand,
although even now he felt that it drew him on.
"By Jove!" he cried, "one would think you were
getting offers every day of your life."</p>

<p>She looked up at him with a brightening
countenance.</p>

<p>"No," she said. "If this is an offer, Cousin
Harry, it is the first I have ever had."</p>

<p>"And you think no more of it than that!" he
cried, with most natural feeling, flinging himself
down in a low wicker-work chair at her feet, so
that he made it shake and tremble. This restored
Hester once more to herself. She began to be<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_230" id="Page_230">[Pg 230]</a></span>
amused, which, in the dull life she was leading,
told for so much.</p>

<p>"How should I take it? I don't know, indeed,
for I never was in the circumstances before. It is
true I have read about it in books," said Hester,
considering. "A girl in a novel would say that it
was a great honour you had done her, Cousin
Harry," for he showed signs of natural impatience,
jumping up and pacing noisily about the room.
"Don't you see it is very difficult. You make a
statement to me about your own state of mind,
and then you look as if you expected something
from me; but what am I to say? I am not in love
with you&mdash;or anybody," Hester added quietly, as if
by an after-thought.</p>

<p>He was coming towards her, with his lips apart
ready to speak; but this quiet little additional word
seemed to stop in a moment what he was going to
say. He did not quite know how, nor did she know,
whether she meant anything by it; but it had an
immediate effect. He gave a gasp as if those
arrested words almost choked him, then said, "Nor
anybody?" suddenly. It had seemed certain to him
before that: she never could have seen any one,
and she had informed him that this was her first
"offer"; nevertheless he took these words&mdash;having
them thrown at him, as it were, in a surprise&mdash;as
a great concession. He drew a long breath,
and said&mdash;</p>

<p>"Then, Hester, there is the more chance for me."</p>

<p>Thus in a moment their relative positions were<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_231" id="Page_231">[Pg 231]</a></span>
changed. Harry had begun by feeling that he had
a great deal to bestow&mdash;many things which no girl
in her senses could neglect or reject. But in a
moment he had been reduced to what in chivalry
should be a lover's only standing-ground, the right
of telling his love with or without response, waiting
absolutely upon his lady's pleasure, hoping for her
bounty&mdash;no more. He was so carried away by this
new impulse that he did not understand himself,
or the change worked in him; but with a gasp as
for breath, turned from the nineteenth-century
version of love-making to the primitive one, not
knowing what he did.</p>

<p>"I don't know," said Hester. "Perhaps; I
cannot tell. I don't know anything about it; and,
if I must tell you the truth, Cousin Harry, I don't
wish to know. It seems to me that all that is silly
between you and me. You can come here as often
as you like: my mother is always glad to see you.
We are all very good friends. What advantage do
you think there would be in turning everything
upside down&mdash;in making a great fuss and disturbance
and changing all our relations? I cannot see
what object there is in it. I think we are much
better to stay as we are."</p>

<p>"But I don't think so," said Harry stoutly. "If
you're going to argue about it, I never was good at
that sort of thing, and you might easily beat me.
But <i>I</i> don't think so. I don't care about being good
friends. I want you to belong to me, to live with
me, you and your mother too. Why! we might go<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_232" id="Page_232">[Pg 232]</a></span>
on as we are doing for a hundred years, and we never
could be of any use to each other&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>Here Hester stopped him with raised hand and
gesture. "Oh, yes, a great deal of use. To be
friends is about the best thing in the world&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Not half so good," cried Harry, "as being man
and wife! My house might all be at sixes and sevens,
and you could not help me to manage it, living here;
and you would never let me be of any use to you.
Don't you see? if we were married I could give
you everything you wanted, it would be natural. We
should get on together, I know. I should never
grudge you anything, and your mother could come
back to her old home, and I should see to her comfort
too. Whereas here, living as we are, what can I
do?&mdash;or you for me?" said Harry. "Ah! that's all
nonsense about being friends. It isn't your friend
I want to be."</p>

<p>"What you say is very curious to me," said Hester.
"There is a great deal that is very fine in it, Cousin
Harry. To offer to give me all that is very nice of
you, and I should like to help you to manage your
house. I have often thought I should like to try&mdash;very
likely I should not succeed, but I should like
to try."</p>

<p>"It is the easiest thing in the world," he said with
a smile that was tender, and touched Hester's heart.
"As soon as ever you marry me&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"But the preliminary is just what I don't like,"
said Hester. "I would rather not marry&mdash;any one.
I don't see the need for it. We are very well as we<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_233" id="Page_233">[Pg 233]</a></span>
are, but we don't know what a new state of things
might do for us."</p>

<p>"I know," said Harry, "what it would do for me.
It would make me very happy and comfortable at
home, which I am not now. It would settle us both
in life. A young fellow is thought nothing of till he
is married. He may go off to the bad at any time,
he may take a wrong turn; and in business he is
never relied upon in the same way. When he has a
wife he has given hostages to society, they say&mdash;that
is what it would do for me. Except being richer and
better off, and able to make your mother comfortable,
and so forth, I can't say, of course, what it would do
for you."</p>

<p>"Nor I either," she said gravely. "All these
things would be very good: but it might make me
into something I shouldn't like. I feel afraid of it.
I have no inclination to it, but all the other way."</p>

<p>"By Jove!" said Harry, which was an exclamation
he never used save when very hard bested, "that
is not very complimentary to me."</p>

<p>"Did you wish me to pay you compliments? No;
we are arguing out the general question," said
Hester, with her serious face.</p>

<p>Harry was at his wits' end with impatience and
provokedness, if we may use such a word. He could
have seized her with his hands and shaken her, and
yet, all the time, he was still conscious that this
strange treatment drew a fellow on.</p>

<p>"I suppose all this means that you won't have
me?" he said, after a pause.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_234" id="Page_234">[Pg 234]</a></span></p>

<p>"I think so, Cousin Harry. I am not satisfied
that it would do us any good; but don't rush away
in a temper," she said, laying her hand lightly on
his arm. "Don't be vexed; why should you? I
don't mean to vex you. If I don't see a thing in the
same light as you do, that is no reason why you
should be angry."</p>

<p>"By Jove!" said Harry again, "if a man is not
to be vexed when he's refused, I wonder what you
think he's made of?&mdash;not flesh and blood."</p>

<p>"Sense," said Hester, "and kindness. These are
things you are made of, whether you are angry or not."</p>

<p>She had risen up, and stood looking at him, as he
turned round hastily and made for the door; but this
flattery (if it was flattery) stopped him. He turned
round again and stood looking at her, tantalised,
provoked, soothed, not knowing what to say.</p>

<p>"If you think all that of me, why won't you
have me?" he said, stretching out wistful hands
towards her.</p>

<p>Hester shook her head.</p>

<p>"I don't want to have&mdash;any one," she said.</p>

<p>Mrs. John had been listening on the stairs. Not
listening&mdash;she was too far off to hear a word&mdash;but
waiting for the indications which a step, a sound of
movement, the opening of a door, might give. The
stair was an old oaken one at the end of the passage,
hidden in the evening dimness; dark at any time
even in the day. When the door did open at last,
though it did so with a little jar as from an agitated
hand, yet two voices came out, and the sound of their<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_235" id="Page_235">[Pg 235]</a></span>
conversation was not angry, nor like that of people
who had quarrelled. But, on the other hand, it was
not low like the talk of lovers; and Mrs. John
could not conceive it possible that if he had been
accepted Harry would have left the house without
seeing her. That was impossible. Either nothing
had been said on the subject, or else&mdash; But what
else? She was confounded, and could not tell what
to think. Hester went out with him to the verandah
door. It was she who did most of the talking.
She called out to him something that sounded like
"Don't be long of coming back," as he went out.
Mrs. John by this time had hurried out of the staircase,
and rushed to a window whence she could see
him departing. He turned round and waved his
hand, but he also shook his head with a look more
completely lover-like than Mrs. John had yet seen
him cast at her child. It was full of tender reproach,
yet pleasure, disappointment, but also something that
was far from despair. "It is all very well for you to
say so," he said. What did it mean? Mrs. John
hurried down when he had disappeared, tingling with
curiosity and anxiety. She found Hester sitting in
the twilight quite unoccupied, her hands in her lap,
her eyes gazing straight before her. Nothing could
be more unlike her usual dislike to idleness. She
was lying back on the settee, thinking, not even
asking for lights. Mrs. John stole to her in the
gathering darkness and gave her a sudden kiss. The
mother was tremulous and shaken, the daughter
very calm.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_236" id="Page_236">[Pg 236]</a></span></p>

<p>"Oh, Hester! what has happened? Have you
accepted him?" said Mrs. John: "have you refused
him? What has been going on? Now it is over,
you might let me know."</p>

<p>"I am just trying to think, mother," Hester said.</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_237" id="Page_237">[Pg 237]</a></span></p>




<h2><a name="CHAPTER_XV" id="CHAPTER_XV">CHAPTER XV.</a></h2>

<h3>WHAT EDWARD THOUGHT.</h3>


<p>The day after this interview, which had excited
everybody, and which, not only Mrs. John, but the
chorus of attentive neighbours had felt in their
hearts to be of the most critical importance, Hester
had, as happened sometimes, a commission from her
mother&mdash;or rather, as she was the active housekeeper
and agent in all their business, a necessity of her
own, which took her into Redborough. Mrs. John had
been brought up in the age when girls were supposed
to be charming and delightful in proportion as they
were helpless, and her residence abroad had confirmed
her in the idea that it was not becoming, or
indeed possible, to permit a young woman "of our
class" to go anywhere alone. But what was it
possible for the poor lady to do! She could not
herself walk into Redborough, a distance which was
nothing in the estimation of the young and energetic.
All that Mrs. John was capable of, was to bemoan
herself, to wring her hands, and complain how dreadfully
things were changed, how incapable she herself<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_238" id="Page_238">[Pg 238]</a></span>
would have been of going anywhere unaccompanied&mdash;all
which galled, almost beyond endurance, the
high spirit of Hester, whose proud consciousness of
perfect capacity to guard herself wherever she choose
to go, was yet so much embittered by the tradition
of her mother's prejudice, that her expeditions,
harmless as they were, always appeared to her as a
sort of confession of lowliness and poverty, and
defiance of the world's opinion. Thus she moved
swift and proud about the streets, looking neither to
the right hand nor the left, with a half-shame, half-scorn
of her unprotectedness, which mingled oddly
with her indignant contempt of the idea of wanting
protection at all. No messenger ever went so
quickly, or returned so soon as Hester, under this
double inspiration. She skimmed along with "that
springy motion in her gait," as straight and as light
as an arrow; and before the chorus of the Vernonry
had finished communicating to each other the exciting
fact that Mrs. John had once more permitted
<i>that</i> girl to go into town by herself, and asking each
other what she could expect was to come of such
proceedings&mdash;Hester would walk back into the midst
of their conclave with such a consciousness of all
their whisperings in the large eyes with which she
contemplated them as she passed to her mother's
door, as suddenly hushed and almost abashed the
eager gossips.</p>

<p>"She can't have been in Redborough," Miss
Matilda would say breathless when the girl disappeared.
"Nobody could go so quickly as that. She<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_239" id="Page_239">[Pg 239]</a></span>
has never been there at all. Dear Mrs. John, how
she is taken in! She must have had some appointment,
some rendezvous, there can't be any doubt
of it."</p>

<p>"You know best, ladies, how such things are
managed," Mr. Mildmay Vernon would say with his
acid smile, which was like a doubled-edged weapon,
and cut every way.</p>

<p>This was the usual course of affairs. But on this
particular day she did not surprise them in their
animadversions by her rapid return. She was as
long as an ordinary mortal. It was already afternoon
when she set out, and the early autumn
twilight had almost begun when she returned home.
The weather was no longer warm enough to permit
of those hostile meetings in the summer-house where
the Vernonry disputed and fraternised. They were
all indoors, looking out&mdash;Miss Matilda seated in her
window, with her work-table displayed, Mr. Mildmay
making himself uncomfortable at the only angle of
his which commanded the gate, to watch for the
girl's return. If Harry accompanied her back the
community felt that this would be certain evidence
as to what had happened; but they were still full
of hope that Harry had not been such a fool. It
strung up their nerves to the highest pitch of
suspense to have to wait so long, especially as it
was evident that Mrs. John too was exceedingly
nervous about her daughter's delay. She was seen
to go out, at least twice, with a shawl over her cap,
to look out along the road, and twice to return<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_240" id="Page_240">[Pg 240]</a></span>
disappointed. What was she anxious about? Very
good cause she had to be anxious with a girl like
<i>that</i>, wandering no one could tell where about the
streets! And where could she be? and whom could
she be with? Of course things could not go on like
this; it must come to light sooner or later; for the
credit of the family it ought not to be allowed to
go on. This was what the chorus said.</p>

<p>In the meantime Hester had done her business as
quickly as usual, but on her return she had found
herself waylaid. Edward, with whom her intercourse
had been so broken, who had established
himself on the footing of a confidential friend on the
first day of her arrival, and at intervals when they
had met by chance since then, had spoken and
looked as if this <i>entente cordiale</i> had never been
disturbed&mdash;Edward was lingering upon the edge of
the Common on this particular afternoon on his way
home apparently, though it was early. It would be
difficult to explain Hester's feelings towards him.
He piqued her curiosity and her interest beyond any
one of the limited circle with which the girl had
to do. There were times when her indignation at
the contrast between his fraternal and almost tender
accost on their accidental meetings, and the way in
which he held himself aloof on more public occasions,
was uncontrollable; but yet there rarely
occurred any of these public occasions without a
meaning look, a word said in an undertone which
conveyed to Hester a curious sense of secret intimacy,
of having more to do with Edward's life than<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_241" id="Page_241">[Pg 241]</a></span>
any of the fine people among whom he was so much
more visibly familiar. She was young enough to
have her imagination excited, and kept in a state
of tantalised interest by these tactics, and also to
be indignant by any suggestion that this mode of
treatment was not honourable on his part. Not
honourable! The idea would have roused Hester
into proud indignation. What was he to her that it
should matter how he behaved? His blowing hot
and cold, his holding off and on, which a moralist
would have condemned summarily, which the gossips
would have delighted in commenting upon, what was
it to her? But it amused her in the meantime with
a constant curiosity and frequent pique, exercising
over her imagination something of the same effect
which her own waywardness had upon Harry, when
he declared that it drew a fellow on. When she got
out of the streets, and saw before her walking slowly,
as if waiting for some one, the figure of this tantalising
and uncertain personage, there was a slight
quickening of Hester's pulses and flutter at her
heart. He had never done anything of this kind
before, and she had a feeling that he had not waited
for her for nothing, but that some further revelation
must be at hand.</p>

<p>"I saw you from my office-window," he said. "I
never saw any one walk like you. I know you at
once at any distance, even in a crowd. Do you
dislike so much walking alone?"</p>

<p>"Why should I?" she asked quickly. "I always
walk alone."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_242" id="Page_242">[Pg 242]</a></span></p>

<p>"That is no answer. One may hate many things
one has to do habitually. Your walk says that you
dislike it. It says, Here am I, who ought to be
guarded like a princess; but I am poor, I have no
escort of honour; yet here I walk, a whole retinue,
a body-guard to myself."</p>

<p>Hester's colour changed from pale to red, and from
red to pale, with mingled indignation and pleasure.
It occurred to her, against her will, that Harry might
have seen her pass for years without learning anything
from her gait.</p>

<p>"I have to be my own body-guard, it is true,"
she said; "but why should I want one at all?
It is folly to suppose a girl requires protection
wherever she goes. Protection! who would harm
me?" she cried, lighting up with an almost angry
glow.</p>

<p>"I for one should not like to try," said Edward,
looking at her, with a look which was habitual to
him when they were alone. What did it mean? A
sort of contemplative regretful admiration as of a
man who would like to say a great deal more than
he dared say&mdash;a sort of, "if I might," "if I could,"
with an element of impatience and almost anger in
the regret. There was a pause, and then he resumed
suddenly, and without any preface, "So it is Harry&mdash;who
is to be the man?"</p>

<p>"Harry!" Hester gasped, suddenly stopping
short, as she had a way of doing when anything
vexed or disturbed her. The rapidity of the attack
took away her breath. Then she added, as most<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_243" id="Page_243">[Pg 243]</a></span>
people, and certainly every girl naturally would add,
"I don't know what you mean."</p>

<p>"Who else?" said Edward, calmly. "He has
his freedom and he knows how to use it. And I
approve him, for my part. I am of the same opinion.
It should be I, if I were he."</p>

<p>It seemed to Hester that all the blood in her
rushed to her throbbing cheeks and aching forehead.
She stamped her foot on the ground.</p>

<p>"Is it of me you dare to speak so?" she cried.
"Oh, I understand you! When one has been
brought up among the Vernons, one knows what
things mean. You venture to tell me that Harry is
the man!&mdash;who else?&mdash;but that you would have
been so had you been free&mdash;the man," cried the girl
with blazing eyes, that smote him with lightnings
not of a harmless kind, "to pick up out of the dust&mdash;me!&mdash;like
something on the roadside."</p>

<p>"You are very eloquent, my little cousin," said
Edward, "not that there is very much in what you
say; but your looks and gesture are as fine as ever
I saw. After all though, is it called for? When I
say that Harry is the man, I do not suppose either
that he is worthy of you, or that you think so; but
you are a girl, what can you do? They would not
let you work, and if you could work, nothing but
daily bread would come of it. And, my dear Hester,
you want a great deal more than daily bread. You
want triumph, power; you want to be as you are
by nature, somebody. Oh, yes," he said, going on
quietly, waving his hand to avert the angry interruption<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_244" id="Page_244">[Pg 244]</a></span>
which was on her lips; "believe me it is so,
even if you don't know it. And how can you do
this, save by marrying? It does not make anything
worse to recognise its real character. You must do
this by marrying. Harry is the first man who offers.
If you were to wait a little longer you might do
better; but you do not feel that you can wait. I
do not blame you. I should do the same were
I you."</p>

<p>All this was said very quietly, the speaker going
on by her side with his eyes turned to the ground,
swinging his stick in a meditative way. The soft
measure of his voice, with little pauses as if to
mark the cadence, exercised a sort of spell upon
the girl, who with passion in all her veins, and a
suffocating sense of growing rage, which made her
almost powerless, and took away words in the very
heat of her need for them&mdash;moved on too against
her will, feeling that she could express herself only
by tones of fury if she attempted to express herself
at all.</p>

<p>"Money does it all," said Edward, in the same
meditative way. "I am supposed to have as much
as he has, but I am tied to an old woman's apron,
and would lose everything were I to venture like he.
Why should he be free and I a slave? I know no
reason. Caprice&mdash;chance, made it so. He might
have been taken in at the Grange, and I at the
White House. Then I should have been the man,
and he been nowhere. It is just so in life. Nothing
but money can set it right. Money does. You can<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_245" id="Page_245">[Pg 245]</a></span>
believe in Providence when you have money. I shall
get it some day; but so far as this goes, I shall be
too late. For you, there are compensations," he
said, giving a little glance at her. "You will find
him very manageable&mdash;more manageable than many
who would have suited you better&mdash;than myself for
instance. I should not have been docile at all&mdash;even
to you&mdash;but he will be. You can do what
you please with him; there is compensation in
all&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Cousin Edward," said Hester, suddenly finding
her voice, "you told me just now that I disliked to
walk alone, that I was poor and had no body-guard.
I said, who would harm me? but you have proved
that it was true, and I a fool. I did want a body-guard,
some one to see that I was not insulted, to
protect me, on a quiet country road, from&mdash;from&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Yes? from&mdash;whom? an unsuccessful suitor: a
man that always has a right to be insulting," cried
Edward with a sort of laugh, "to relieve his mind.
True! to be sure all these things are true. It is
quite right that a girl needs protection. Men are
stronger than she is, and they will insult her if it is
in their power, if not in one way then in another.
The weak will always go to the wall. If there is
nobody to take care of you, and nobody to punish me
for it, of course I shall treat you badly. If I am not
any worse than my neighbours I don't pretend to be
any better. Do you think I should have waited for
you to-night if I had not wanted to insult you?<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_246" id="Page_246">[Pg 246]</a></span>
because you were alone and unprotected and unfriended,"
he said, with a sort of snarl at her, turning
upon her with a fierce sneer on his face.</p>

<p>Hester was struck with a horror which stopped her
indignation in full career. "Oh," she cried, "how can
you make yourself out to be so ignoble, so
ungenerous! even when you say it I cannot believe
it; to insult me cannot be what you mean."</p>

<p>"Why not?" he said, looking at her, "you can't
do anything to me. For your own sake you will tell
nobody that Edward Vernon met you and&mdash;said
anything that he ought not to have said. Besides,
if you wished to ruin me with <i>her</i>," he waved his
hand towards the Grange as he spoke, "in the first
place she would not believe you, in the second place
if it came to that I should not much mind. It would
be emancipation anyhow; I should be no longer a
slave bound to follow a woman, in chains. If I lost
in one way, I should gain in another. But I am
safe with you," he said with another laugh; "I am
free to irritate you, to outrage you as much as I
please; you will not complain: and in that case why
should not I take it out of you?" he cried, turning
fiercely upon her.</p>

<p>Hester was too much startled to retain the violent
indignation and offence of her first impulse. She
was overwhelmed with pity and horror.</p>

<p>"Cousin Edward," she said, "you do not mean
all that. You did not come here to insult me. You
must have had some other thought. You must be
very unhappy somehow, and troubled, and distressed<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_247" id="Page_247">[Pg 247]</a></span>
to speak as you are doing now. It comes out of
yourself, it is not anything about me."</p>

<p>"Oh, yes, it is something about you," he said
with a laugh. Then after a pause, "But you have
some insight all the same. No. I'll tell you what
it is; it is money, money, Hester&mdash;that is what we
all want. If you had it you would no more marry
Harry than old Rule; if I had it&mdash;&mdash;And the thing
clear is that I must have it," said Edward, breaking
off abruptly. "I can't wait."</p>

<p>Hester went home very much bewildered, outraged
by all he said, yet more sorry than angry.
He had not made any reply to her appeal for his
confidence, yet she knew that she was right&mdash;that it
was out of a troubled and miserable heart that he
had spoken, not merely out of wounded feeling on
the subject of herself. She did not know whether he
understood what she said to him on the subject of
Harry, or if that penetrated his mind at all; but she
went home at once more miserable and more interested
than she thought she had ever been in her life.
Had not she too drawn some conclusion of the same
kind from her own experiences, from the atmosphere
of the Vernonry so full of ingratitude, unkindness,
and all uncharitableness? She came very slowly
home, and took no notice of the way in which
Mildmay Vernon squinted at her from his corner,
and the Miss Ridgways waved their hands from the
window. Harry then had not come home with her.
"I knew he was not such a fool," the male observer<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_248" id="Page_248">[Pg 248]</a></span>
said to himself, and the sisters laughed and talked in
quite an outburst of gaiety for some time after.
"Harry Vernon think of <i>that</i> girl! of course he did
not. Who would? so ill brought up, with such
manners, and hair that is nearly red," they said.</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_249" id="Page_249">[Pg 249]</a></span></p>




<h2><a name="CHAPTER_XVI" id="CHAPTER_XVI">CHAPTER XVI.</a></h2>

<h3>WALKS AND TALKS.</h3>


<p>"They tell me you are to be congratulated,
Hester," said old Captain Morgan.</p>

<p>She had met him taking his evening walk, and
in that and in his aspect altogether there was
something altogether despondent&mdash;a depression and
air of weakness which was not common with the
old man. She had not gone with him for some
days, and perhaps he had felt the desertion. The
first thing Hester did was to draw his hand within
her arm.</p>

<p>"You are tired," she said.</p>

<p>"Not very. I am a silly old fellow and always go
too far. I have been thinking of you, my dear; and
if you are to be congratulated&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"No; I don't think so, Captain Morgan. What
about?"</p>

<p>"About&mdash;&mdash; If anything so important had
happened you would have come and told me,
Hester."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_250" id="Page_250">[Pg 250]</a></span></p>

<p>"I am glad you see that at last. But yes, there
is something to congratulate me upon. Nothing did
happen. Is not that a great deal to say? For I
was tempted, sadly tempted."</p>

<p>"My dear, I don't understand that."</p>

<p>Hester laughed.</p>

<p>"You see, Captain Morgan, you are wise and know
a great deal; but you were never a girl&mdash;and a poor
girl. It would have been so delightful to put my
mother back in her nice house, and show Catherine&mdash;&mdash;"
Here she paused somewhat embarrassed.</p>

<p>"What of Catherine?" he said.</p>

<p>"Oh, not much&mdash;they were, perhaps, when they
were young&mdash;on different sides. My mother has
come down, and Cousin Catherine has gone up. I
should like to have put the balance straight."</p>

<p>"To bring Catherine down, and put your
mother&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"No, Captain Morgan. Catherine is always good
when she is with you. I think I almost like her
<i>then</i>. I would not harm her," said Hester, holding
up her head, "if I had the power to do it. But she
scorns every one of us; perhaps because we all
consent to eat her bread. I would not, you know,
if I could help it."</p>

<p>"I know you are ungenerous, Hester, in that
respect."</p>

<p>"Ungenerous! Well, never mind, there are more
kinds of ungenerosity than one. I am going in with
you to tell Mrs. Morgan."</p>

<p>"I am not sure," said the old captain, "though it<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_251" id="Page_251">[Pg 251]</a></span>
is a wretched piece of self-denial, that I want you
to come with me to-night."</p>

<p>Hester opened her great eyes wide.</p>

<p>"Why!" she said. It was the one house in the
world to which she felt she had a right.</p>

<p>"That is nonsense, however," said the old man;
"for of course you must meet. We have got our
grandson, Hester."</p>

<p>"I heard somebody had come, but I thought it
was a gentleman. I did not know you had any&mdash;children&mdash;except
little Mary."</p>

<p>"We have none&mdash;in this world; but do you think
my wife would have been what she is with never a
child? We all have our disabilities, my love. I
have never been a young girl, and you have never
been an old&mdash;pair."</p>

<p>They both laughed. Hester with the easily-recovered
cheerfulness of youth, he in tremulous
tones, which had as much pathos as mirth in them.</p>

<p>"This is the son of my daughter," he said. "She
has been long dead, poor girl&mdash;happily for her.
Unless when there is some business connected with
them to be settled we don't talk much of them.
My wife and I long ago went back to the honeymoon
stage. We have had to live for each other: and
very glad to have each other to live for. Children
are very strange, my dear."</p>

<p>"Are they?" said Hester, with an awe which she
could scarcely understand.</p>

<p>"Very strange. So dependent upon you for long,
so independent after; so unlike you, that you cannot<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_252" id="Page_252">[Pg 252]</a></span>
understand what you have to do with them. Perhaps
it is a penalty of living so long as we have done.
I have a theory," said the old captain, cheering up,
"that after seventy, when you have lived out your
life, you begin another. And it is quite different.
It is a pity we can't renew the old bodies&mdash;eyes
and ears and legs and all the rest of it. It would
be a very interesting experiment."</p>

<p>"Like the people who found the elixir of life, or
the Wandering Jew?"</p>

<p>The girl spoke to humour him, herself wondering
over every word with that curiosity, mingled with
pity and tenderness and half disapproval, with which
youth listens to the vagaries of age.</p>

<p>"Not at all like the Wandering Jew; his life was
continuous and one-ideaed," said Captain Morgan,
delighted to get upon his hobby. "And I miss a
great deal in the stories of those who get the elixir.
They may renew their lives but not themselves.
There is one I recollect at this moment, St. Leon.
Of course you have never read St. Leon. He
becomes a beautiful young man, and the rival of his
son, who, of course, does not know him. But the
old fellow knows <i>him</i>. He is an old fellow notwithstanding
his elixir; the soul of him is just the same.
That is not my point of view."</p>

<p>The old man had become quite erect and walked
smartly, animated by his fancy, leading Hester with
him rather than leaning on her.</p>

<p>"No," he repeated, "that is not at all my point of
view. The bodies keep old, the minds get&mdash;different.<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_253" id="Page_253">[Pg 253]</a></span>
I have shaken off my old burdens. I don't take
any more responsibility for those who&mdash;used to
belong to me. They don't belong to me any longer.
They are labouring along in the former life. I have
started in the new."</p>

<p>"But Mrs. Morgan?" said Hester, with a quaver
in her voice.</p>

<p>"Ah! there's the blot," said the old man. "Of
course, she and I belong to each other for ever and
ever. Oh, I don't want to begin again without my
old wife; and she won't give up the children,
though they are children no longer. Once a mother,
always a mother, Hester. You women are sadly
fettered&mdash;you can't shake it off."</p>

<p>"Nor you either, Captain Morgan!" cried Hester,
indignant. She could not bear that he should
so wrong himself.</p>

<p>"My dear, I could do it&mdash;without difficulty. Is
it just, do you think, that one human creature
should be made the victim of another, simply because
he has been instrumental in bringing that other into
the world? Supposing that they have drained all
that was best in me out of me for years? Supposing
that they have made my life hard and bitter to me?
Supposing that they have grown alien to me in every
respect&mdash;thinking other thoughts, walking in other
ways? And that they are as old and more worldly
than I am&mdash;older, less open to any influence of nature&mdash;am
I to go treating these old rigid commonplace
people as if they were my children still, and breaking
my heart about them? No; no."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_254" id="Page_254">[Pg 254]</a></span></p>

<p>This seemed a terrible speech to Hester. She kept
patting his arm softly with her hand, and saying, "Oh,
Captain Morgan! You do not mean that!" again and
again. It was dreadful that he should say this. A
father to give up his children! It hurt Hester to
think that such an idea could find entrance into
any mind.</p>

<p>"And as for the grandchildren, that is out of the
question altogether," Captain Morgan said; "I am
not going to begin a new life of trouble through
them."</p>

<p>"I thought," said Hester, "that fathers and
mothers never could forget their children&mdash;it is in
the Bible."</p>

<p>"'Can a woman forget?' It is a woman, my
dear. There is nothing about a man. My wife is
horrified at what I say, as much as you are. But
for all that there is justice in everything, and one
soul should not be sacrificed for another. Well,
will you come in? I do not forbid you; but don't
take much notice, I warn you, Hester, of the person
you are going to meet."</p>

<p>The person she was going to meet! This was
enough to make her curious, if not prepossess her in
favour of the unknown, who, however, she expected
to be introduced to her in the shape of a schoolboy&mdash;perhaps
a heavy schoolboy&mdash;a sort of being for
whom the girl had an instinctive dislike. She followed
the old captain into the house almost mechanically.
Mrs. Morgan's chair, now that it began to be
chilly in the evenings, was placed so as to approach<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_255" id="Page_255">[Pg 255]</a></span>
the fire, which in the evening was now always
lighted, and sent out a cheerful glow. It was more
cheerful than usual to-night, coming in from the grey
of the waning light outside. There was no lamp,
but only the leaping flame of the fire. The sound
of cheerful voices in conversation, even of laughter,
was audible as the door was opened. The quiet in
which the old lady generally sat waiting for her husband's
return&mdash;a tranquillity which was peace itself,
yet a silent peacefulness&mdash;had always seemed very
sweet to Hester. That soft stillness of waiting had
seemed to her the very atmosphere of love; but now
at the door, even before she entered, she was conscious
of a difference. Life had entered in. The voices
were not forced or measured, but chiming with each
other in the free interchange of familiar affection:
the old lady's soft little laugh enticing a louder
laughter; her voice alternating with the deeper tones.
There was no pause in this lively conversation; but
some one rose up against the firelight&mdash;a tall, straight
figure, no schoolboy, as was evident at the first glance&mdash;when
they went in. But, indeed, the first glance
was not supported by any further revelation, for
after the little commotion occasioned by their
entrance, the stranger subsided into his chair again,
and remained to Hester, till her departure, a shadow
only, with a singularly soft and harmonious voice. It
got up again to bow to her. And it went on talking,
out of the gloom, as she, sitting in the full glare of
the light, kept shyly by Mrs. Morgan's side. Why
was she shy? It was not her disposition to be shy.<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_256" id="Page_256">[Pg 256]</a></span>
This evening a gentle embarrassment was upon her.
She had a pleasure in sitting there by the old lady's
side, defended by the darkness from all necessity of
saying anything, sharing, she could scarcely tell why,
the content which trembled in every tone of her old
friend's voice. The captain did not take any share
in this talk. He sat down behind backs, saying that
the fire was too much for him, with a long-drawn
breath that sounded like a sigh. Once or twice he
was appealed to by name, and made a brief response;
but he took no part in the conversation. On ordinary
occasions it was he who talked, Mrs. Morgan in her
great chair remaining quietly quiescent, now and then
making a remark. It was very strange to see the
captain thrown thus into the background; but,
curiously enough, Hester did not remark it, so much
was she occupied with the novelty of the conversation.
When the door opened she was alarmed lest it
should be the lights that were coming, so much more
satisfactory was it to let things remain as they were.
The unseen speaker talked about a great many things
altogether unknown to Hester&mdash;his brothers and
sisters, his cousins, a throng of unknown Christian
names, every one of which it was evident had
characteristics of its own with which both the speakers
were acquainted. The listener felt as if a throng of
new acquaintances crowded softly in, filling the dim
place with not unfriendly faces.</p>

<p>"And what is Elinor doing?" Mrs. Morgan
said.</p>

<p>"It is easy to answer that question, grandmother.<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_257" id="Page_257">[Pg 257]</a></span>
She is spoiling her children, and we all know
so much better, we who have none."</p>

<p>"Yes, yes; that is always the way," said the old
lady. "But, Roland, you must tell her from me
that it is very foolish. She will not think it is
ignorance on my part. Her mother, poor dear,
was just the same," and here the old lady shook
her head softly, with a glitter in her eyes, as if a
tear was not far off; but if so, there was sweetness
in the tear. She turned, after a time, to Hester,
who sat by, with a strange sort of pleasure to which
she was unaccustomed, listening, in surprised interest,
without wishing to take any part.</p>

<p>"You are surprised to hear me so talkative,
Hester? But it is not often I have a grandson to
wake me up. You did not know I had one
perhaps? Ah! I have been hearing of so many
people that I don't often hear of. That does an
old body good."</p>

<p>"I like it too," said Hester, the firelight adding
colour and animation to her face. "I did not
know there were so many people in the world."</p>

<p>"That's very pretty of you to say, my dear,"
said the old lady. "I was afraid you would think
it all gossip; but they are people who belong to
me, the most of them. And letters don't tell you
like the voice. You must run away when you are
tired, for I think I shall go on asking questions
till midnight. This young lady&mdash;this dear girl&mdash;Roland,
is the comfort of our lives."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_258" id="Page_258">[Pg 258]</a></span></p>

<p>"I thought no less," said the voice of the shadow,
with a softness which went to Hester's heart, sending
a little thrill of pleasure through her. She had
not even seen his face&mdash;but she could not be unaware
that he was looking at hers&mdash;from the protecting
darkness on the other side of the fire. This curious
pleasurable encounter, as through a veil, of two fresh
souls, hitherto unknown to each other&mdash;a moment as
full of enchantment as can be in this world&mdash;was
suddenly broken in upon by the old captain, who
jumped up, notwithstanding his rheumatism, as
quickly as a boy, and, coming between, stood up
with his back to the fire, interrupting the light.</p>

<p>"My old woman," he said, "your Elinors and your
Emilys are like a book to her. It is like reading a
chapter at hazard out of a novel; but there is no end
to the story and no beginning, and she is at this
moment deep in her own&mdash;approaching the end of the
third volume."</p>

<p>"I should have said, to see Miss Vernon," said
the stranger, who was more a voice than ever,
now that the old man interrupted what little light
there was, "that she was at the beginning of the
first."</p>

<p>Was it the beginning of the first? Hester felt
a wave of colour fly over her face, and thought in
her heart that the new-comer was right. The initial
chapter&mdash;surely this was true; not even a
beginning, but something that went before any
beginning.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_259" id="Page_259">[Pg 259]</a></span></p>

<p>"It never answers," said Captain Morgan, "to give
an opinion without knowledge of the facts. You are
a clever fellow, Roland, but not so clever as that
comes to. You will find, Hester, that round every
human creature you come across, there is some kind
of a world hanging 'bound with gold chains about
the feet of&mdash;&mdash;' That is the most uncomfortable
metaphor I know. I wonder what Mr. Tennyson
could have been thinking of? Did he think that
this round world was hanging on like a big ball,
hampering the going of God, do you suppose? But
there is something of that kind, true enough, with
men."</p>

<p>"If you mean that for me," said the old lady,
smiling, "you are wrong, Rowley. God knows my
heart yearns after them all, great and small, and it is
the greatest refreshment and no hampering, to hear
about them all&mdash;their pleasures and their troubles.
What hurts me is to keep it all in and ask no questions,
as so often I have to do."</p>

<p>The old captain shook his head. He kept on
shaking it gently.</p>

<p>"We have argued that question a great many
times," he said, "but I am not convinced."</p>

<p>What was evident was, that he intended this conversation
which had been so animated and pleasant to
come to an end. He could not surely be unkind?
But he placed himself, as it were, in the midst of the
current, and stopped its flowing. A sensation of
vexed displeasure and disappointment with her old<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_260" id="Page_260">[Pg 260]</a></span>
friend whom she loved rose in Hester's mind. Was
it like him to reject the kindness of kin, to limit his
wife in her affections, to turn a cold shoulder on his
grandson? And yet all these things he seemed
to do. "Roland" on the other side (she knew no
other name for him), had been silenced. He had
scarcely attempted to speak since the old man took
that place in front of the fire, from which his shadow
fell like a dark pillar across the room, dividing the
side on which Mrs. Morgan sat with Hester beside
her, from the other on which was the new being with
whom Hester had already formed an almost intimate
acquaintance she felt, though she did not know his
name and had not seen his face. This very uncertainty
pleased her imagination, and inclined her to
the new-comer. But it was embarrassing to find herself
in the midst of a scene, where so many confusing
uncomprehended elements were at work, and where
something which was not family harmony and peace
lay evidently under the surface. When she rose up
to go away, the unknown rose too; but the captain
was on the alert.</p>

<p>"You can now go back to your gossip," he said,
"my dear: for I mean to see Hester round the
corner."</p>

<p>"No, Captain Morgan. It is very damp, and your
rheumatism&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Bah! my rheumatism. There are worse things
than my rheumatism," he said, bustling to get his
coat.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_261" id="Page_261">[Pg 261]</a></span></p>

<p>"Might I not replace you, grandfather? It would
be a pleasure, and I have no rheumatism."</p>

<p>This idea pleased Hester. It would be only for a
moment; but he was something new. She was so
sadly familiar with every person and thing about
that any novelty was delightful to her. But the
captain was not to be shaken off. He pushed Roland
back into his seat. "There are worse things than
rheumatism," he said. And he scrambled into his
coat and took Hester under his arm with unwonted
formality. She felt annoyed and angry beyond
description, vexed with her old friend. Why should
he interrupt the innocent talk? Why interfere so
pointedly to prevent the simplest communication
between her and the stranger? A mere politeness,
where could have been the harm of that? And
then it was quite unnecessary that anybody should
see her home. That the old man should risk an
illness to do this, when she had so often run unattended
from one door to the other, was more
irritating than words could say. And, what was
worst of all, it made the captain less perfect in her
opinion&mdash;the captain of whom she had felt that, all
the rest of the world failing her, here was still an
excellence upon which she could fall back.</p>

<p>Since they had come in, though the interval was
short, the autumn evening had closed in completely. It
was very damp and cold. The Common lay in a white
mist; the sky hazy, with a few faint stars looking
down through veils of vapour; the atmosphere heavy.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_262" id="Page_262">[Pg 262]</a></span></p>

<p>"Why should you come out to catch cold?" Hester
said. "I want no one. I am quite able to take
care of myself."</p>

<p>"And I want no one, my dear, except myself, to
have anything to do with you," said the old man.
"I am not afraid to tell you my meaning, without
disguise."</p>

<p>"Then stand at the door while I run home," she
pleaded; but he would not spare her a step of the
way. He hobbled along to the verandah, with his
comforter twisted about his throat and mouth,
speaking out of the folds of it with a muffled voice.</p>

<p>"If it was any girl but you I should be afraid to
say it, lest the mere contradiction might be enough
for them; but with you I am not afraid," he said.</p>

<p>Was his confidence justified? Was Hester too
wise to be moved by that hint of opposition, that
sense that a thing which is forbidden must be
pleasant? It is dangerous to predict of any one
that this will be the case; and perhaps the captain
did his best to falsify his own hope. He took her to
the very door and saw her admitted, as if there
might be a chance up to the last moment of the
alarming grandson still producing himself to work
her harm. And then he hobbled back in the gathering
mists. He even stood lingering at his own
door before he went in to the fireside and the
cheerful light.</p>

<p>"Neither Catherine nor Hester, neither the young
nor the old," he said to himself. In his earnestness<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_263" id="Page_263">[Pg 263]</a></span>
he repeated the words half aloud, "Neither Catherine
nor Hester, neither money nor love." And then
there came something of scorn into the old man's
voice. "If his father's son is capable of love,"
he said.</p>

<h2><a name="CHAPTER_I" id="CHAPTER_I">CHAPTER XVII.</a></h2>

<h3>THE YOUNG AND THE OLD.</h3>


<p>"I like your Roland," said Miss Vernon. She
had come to pay one of her usual visits to her old
relations. The grandson whom Hester had made
acquaintance with without seeing his face, had now
been nearly a week at the Vernonry and was known
to everybody about. The captain's precautions had,
of course, come to nothing. He had gone, as in duty
bound, to pay his respects to the great lady who
was his relation too, though in a far-off degree, and
he had pleased her. Catherine thought of nothing
less than of giving a great pleasure to her old friends
by her praise. "He is full of news and information,
which is a godsend to us country folks, and he is
very good-looking, <i>qui ne g&acirc;te rien</i>."</p>

<p>Mrs. Morgan looked up from her place by the
fireside with a smile of pleasure. She sat folding her
peaceful old hands with an air of beatitude, which,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_2" id="Page_2">[Pg 2]</a></span>
notwithstanding her content, had not been upon
her countenance before the young man's arrival.</p>

<p>"That is a great pleasure to me, Catherine&mdash;to
know that you like him," said the old lady. "He
seems to me all that, and kind besides."</p>

<p>"What I should have expected your grandson to
be," said Catherine. "I want him to see the people
here, and make a few acquaintances. I don't suppose
that our little people at Redborough can be of much
importance to a young man in town; still it is a pity
to neglect an opportunity. He is coming to dine
with me to-morrow&mdash;as I suppose he told you?"</p>

<p>The old lady nodded her head several times with
the same soft smile of happiness.</p>

<p>"You are always good," she said; "you have done
everything, Catherine, for me and my old man. But
if you want to go straight to my heart you know the
way lies through the children&mdash;my poor Katie's boys."</p>

<p>"I am glad that the direct route is so easy," Miss
Vernon said in her fine, large, beneficent way; "at
least in this case. The others I don't know."</p>

<p>Captain Morgan came and stood between his wife
and the visitor. To be sure it was to the fire he
went, by which he posted himself with his back to it,
as is the right of every Englishman. His countenance
wore a troubled look, very different from the happiness
of his wife's. He stood like a barrier between
them, a non-conductor intercepting the passage of
genial sentiment.</p>

<p>"My dear Catherine," he said, with a little formality,
"I don't wish to be unkind, nor to check your<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_3" id="Page_3">[Pg 3]</a></span>
kindness; but you must recollect that though he is
poor Katie's boy, she, poor soul, had nothing to do
with the up-bringing of him, and that, in short, we
know nothing about him. It has been my principle,
as you know, of late years, to insist upon living my
own life."</p>

<p>"All that, my kind old uncle, is understood," said
Catherine. "There are a great many people, I
believe, who are better than their principles, and
you are one of them&mdash;that is all. I understand that
you know nothing about him. You are only a man,
which is a great drawback, but it is not to be helped:
<i>we</i> know, though we have seen no more of him than
you have. Isn't it so?"</p>

<p>She leaned forward a little, and looked across at
the old lady, who smiled and nodded in return. Old
Mrs. Morgan was not disturbed by her husband's
disagreement. It did not even make her angry.
She took it with perfect composure, beaming over
her own discovery of her grandson, and the additional
happiness it had brought.</p>

<p>"My old man," she said, "Catherine, has his own
ways of thinking, we all know that; and sometimes
he will act upon them, but most commonly not. One
thing I know, he will never shut his doors on his own
flesh and blood, nor deny his old wife what is her
greatest pleasure&mdash;the thing that has been wanting
to me all the time&mdash;all the time! I scarcely knew
what it was. And if the boy had been distant or
strange, or showed that he knew nothing about us,
still I should have been content. I would have said,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_4" id="Page_4">[Pg 4]</a></span>
'Let him go; you were right, Rowley, and not I.'
But it is not so," the old lady went on after a pause,
"there's love in him. I remember when the girls
were married there was something I always seemed
to want, I found out what it was when the
first grandchild was born. It was to feel a baby in
my arms again&mdash;that was what I wanted. I don't
know, Catherine," she added with humility, "if you
will think that foolish?"</p>

<p>"If I will understand&mdash;that is what you are
doubtful of&mdash;for I am an old maid, and never had,
so to speak, a baby in my arms; but I do understand,"
said Catherine, with a little moisture in her
eyes. "Well, and this great handsome fellow, a
man of the world, is he your baby that you wanted
so much?"</p>

<p>"Pooh!" said the old captain. "The great
advantage of being an old maid, as you say, is that
you are above the prejudices of parentage. It is
possible to get you to hear reason. Why should
my life be overshadowed permanently by the action
of another? That is what I ask. Why should I
be responsible for one who is not me, nor of my
mind?"</p>

<p>"Listen to him! You would think that was all
he knows," said Mrs. Morgan; "there is no
fathoming that old man, my dear."</p>

<p>"What I have to say is, that we know nothing
of this young man," said the captain, shaking his
shaggy head as if to shake off his wife's comments.
"You will exercise your own judgment&mdash;but don't<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_5" id="Page_5">[Pg 5]</a></span>
take him on mine, for I don't know him. He is
well enough to look at; he has plenty to say for
himself; I dare say he is clever enough. Form
your own judgment and act upon that, but don't
come and say it's our fault if he disappoints you&mdash;that
is all I have to say. Excuse me, Catherine,
if I take a walk even while you are here, for this
puts me out&mdash;I allow it puts me out," Captain
Morgan said.</p>

<p>"What has made him take this idea?" said
Miss Vernon, when Captain Morgan had hobbled
out.</p>

<p>"Oh, my dear, he has his fancies like another.
We have had many things to put up with, and he
thinks when it comes to the second generation&mdash;he
thinks we have a right to peace and quiet in
our old age."</p>

<p>"And so you have," said Catherine gravely, "so
you have."</p>

<p>She did not ask any questions. Neither she nor
any one knew what it was with which, in the other
part of their lives, these old people had been compelled
to "put up." Nor did the old lady say.
She answered softly, "Yes, I think so too. Peace
is sweet, but it is not life."</p>

<p>"Some people would say it was better."</p>

<p>"They never knew, those people, what life was.
I like to see the children come and go&mdash;one here,
one there. One in need of your sympathy, another
of your help, another, oh Catherine, even that&mdash;of
your pardon, my dear!" This made her pause,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_6" id="Page_6">[Pg 6]</a></span>
and brought, what was so unusual, a little glistening
moisture to the old lady's eyes. She was silent for
a moment, and smiled, perhaps to efface the impression
she had made. "If you can do nothing
else for them you can always do that," she said.</p>

<p>Catherine Vernon, who was sixty-five, and knew
herself to be an old woman, looked at the other, who
was over eighty, as a girl looks at her mother&mdash;wondering
at her strange experiences, feeling herself
a child in presence of a knowledge which is not hers.
She had not experience enough to understand this
philosophy. She looked for a little at her companion,
wondering, and then she said, soothingly&mdash;</p>

<p>"We must not dwell upon painful subjects. This
young fellow will not appeal to you so. What I
like in him is his independence. He has his own
opinion, and he expresses it freely. His society will
be very good for my nephew Edward. If he has
a fault&mdash;and, indeed, I don't think that boy has
many&mdash;it is that he is diffident about his own
opinion. Roland, if he stays long enough, will
help to cure him of that. And how does the other
affair go on?" she added, with a perceptible pause,
and in a voice which was a little constrained. "No
doubt there is great triumph next door."</p>

<p>Old Mrs. Morgan shook her head.</p>

<p>"It is curious what mistakes we all make," she
said.</p>

<p>"Mistakes? Do you mean that I am mistaken
about the triumph? Well, they have very good
reason. I should triumph too, if having been turned<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_7" id="Page_7">[Pg 7]</a></span>
out of a great house, like Mrs. John, I managed to
get back again, and recover all that I had lost by
means of a thing so entirely my own creation as a
daughter. Even a son would have been different&mdash;I
suppose. You know I am not a judge on that
point," Catherine said with a laugh.</p>

<p>The old lady continued to shake her head
slowly.</p>

<p>"The only one that has not made a mistake is
Harry. If he could have got what he wanted, it
would have been the best thing that could have
happened. There is no complication about that.
For him it would have been the best."</p>

<p>"Do you mean to say," said Catherine, her eyes
lighting up with that fire of curiosity and interest
which overcomes even the languor of age. "Do
you mean to say that&mdash;he is not to get what he
wishes? Oh, this is too much! That girl is eaten
up with pride. What is she saving herself for, I
wonder? What can she expect?"</p>

<p>Again old Mrs. Morgan shook her head, smiling
softly as at blunders upon which she could not be
too severe.</p>

<p>"I have said already what mistakes we make,
Catherine! often in our own career, always about
other people, my dear."</p>

<p>Upon this Catherine laughed, not having, though
she esteemed her old relation greatly, as much respect
for her judgment as probably it deserved. Miss
Vernon was too sensible a woman either to feel
or express any contempt for her own sex, as clever<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_8" id="Page_8">[Pg 8]</a></span>
women who were not sensible used to do in those
days; but there was an undertone in her mind of
indifference, to say the least, of another woman's
opinion. She had a feeling that it could not be
any better, and most likely was not so good, as
her own, for she had held a position not usual
among women, and knew that not many would
have proved equal to the emergency as she did.
What the old captain said would have impressed
her more than what his wife said, and this although
she was perfectly aware that the old lady in many
cases was considered the most judicious of the two.</p>

<p>"I know you are both fanatics for Hester," she
said, "who is not my favourite as she is yours.
You must take care that Roland does not fall a
victim to her. There are few girls about, and in
that case, when young men have a mind to make
fools of themselves, there is no choice. Do not
shake your kind head off; you know this is a
thing in which we have agreed we shall never
think alike."</p>

<p>"Never is a long day," said the old lady, tranquilly.
She was well used to waiting. In her
experience, so many things had come to pass which
no one expected. Even now, she said to herself,
if any one had told her that Roland Ashton would
one day be under her roof&mdash;She added quietly,
"You are too much alike to do each other
justice."</p>

<p>At this Catherine grew red. It had been intimated
to her before, and she had scarcely been<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_9" id="Page_9">[Pg 9]</a></span>
able to support the imputation. But she mastered
herself with an effort. Nowhere perhaps but in
this house would she have done so; but these
old people had an ascendency over her which she
could not explain.</p>

<p>"We will say nothing on that point," she said,
quickly. "Your news has taken me so completely
by surprise. Are you sure of it? Why should
Mrs. John's daughter have rejected so excellent a
settlement? She is looking for something better,
I suppose?"</p>

<p>"I think that was a mistake too," said the old
lady. "She says herself that Harry, though he is
not clever, is good and true. Ah! it is you who
shake your head now. In some things even our
Catherine fails; he is not the equal of Hester; but
it is not my opinion that a man need be always
superior to his wife. Where there is love, it does
not matter. I should have been pleased to see it;
but she is young; she thinks differently. She is
looking for nothing consciously; but in her heart
for love, which is the visitor one is always looking
for when one is young."</p>

<p>"Pshaw!" said Catherine; "it is the old people
that are romantic, not the young. It is the settlements
that are the things to be considered; or
perhaps she is thinking of a title? Her mother is
capable of any nonsense," she said with a scornful
laugh.</p>

<p>Mrs. Morgan made no reply. Her peaceful aspect
with her folded hands, the soft little smile on her old<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_10" id="Page_10">[Pg 10]</a></span>
mouth, the slight shake of the head, was perhaps a
trial of patience for the other, who felt herself thrown
back into the category of the young and superficial
by this calm expectation and quietness. Catherine
Vernon was still in the region of prejudice and dislike.
She had not lived into that superior sphere of
toleration and calm. Impatience filled her veins. But
she mastered herself, the atmosphere subduing her.
And Captain Morgan came hobbling back, having
calmed himself down too.</p>

<p>"Ellen has come back," said Miss Vernon, to
change the subject, "from Paris, with clothes enough
for all the neighbourhood. It amuses me to think of
her among the bonnet-shops. What true enjoyment!
and scarcely less now to show them to all her friends.
Now there is a pleasure you cannot enjoy, uncle. A
man could not call his friends together to look at
his new hats."</p>

<p>"There is no telling what a young man can do in
the way of folly till he is put to it," said the captain.
"I am loth to recognise any inferiority. What do
you think about all these failures, Catherine? or
rather, if you have withdrawn from it, what do the
boys think?"</p>

<p>"I hope I am still capable of giving an opinion,"
said Miss Vernon. "None of them touch us, which
is the chief thing. For my part, speculation in this
wild way is my horror. If you could see the proposals
that used to be put before me! Not an undertaking
that was not the safest and the surest in
the world! The boys are well indoctrinated in my<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_11" id="Page_11">[Pg 11]</a></span>
opinions on that subject. They know better, I hope,
than to snatch at a high percentage; and love the
substance, the good honest capital, which I love. I
think," she continued, "there is a little of a miser in
me, or perhaps you will say in all women. I love to
see my money&mdash;to count it over like the&mdash;&mdash; By the
way, it was the king that did that while the queen
was eating her bread and honey. That goes against
my theory."</p>

<p>"A good many things go against your theory.
They say that there are no such wild speculators as
women. It seems easy to them that a sort of miracle
should happen; that something should come out of
nothing."</p>

<p>"They have not had my experience," said Catherine.
"But Edward and Harry are as steady as two churches;
that is," she added with a complacency which they
all recollected afterwards, "Edward is the head; the
other fortunately has the good sense not to attempt
to think for himself."</p>

<p>"Hester would have done that for him," said
Mrs. Morgan, in an undertone; but Catherine caught
it and went on with heightened colour, for the idea
that Hester&mdash;<i>that</i> girl!&mdash;might have had something
to say in the government of the bank, struck her as
if some one had given her a blow.</p>

<p>"Edward is the heart and soul of everything,"
she said. "How fortunate it was for me that my
choice fell upon that boy. I should say he had an
old head on young shoulders, but that I don't like
the conjunction. He is young enough. He has<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_12" id="Page_12">[Pg 12]</a></span>
always been accustomed to family life, and loves his
home."</p>

<p>"It is, no doubt," said Captain Morgan, kindly,
"that he has had the advantage of your own experience
and teaching more than the other, Catherine."</p>

<p>"That would be a delightful thought for me,"
Miss Vernon said with a suffusion of pleasure in her
eyes. "Perhaps there is some truth in it. I have
done my best to share my lights, such as they are,
with him; but he goes beyond me. And to think
that I hesitated between Edward and Harry! I hope
I am grateful to Providence that turned me to the
best. The other family are following out their lot
quite characteristically. Ellen's husband has a good
deal of worldly sense, which is wanting to that bit
of a butterfly. He is trying hard to get her to make
up to me. She has come to see me twice, full of
pretty speeches about Algy's great respect for me.
Human nature," said Catherine with a laugh, "is as
good, nay, far better, than a play. How cunning it
thinks it is, but in reality how very easy to see
through."</p>

<p>Here old Mrs. Morgan began to shake her head
again, smiling always, but with an indulgent, gentle
contradictoriness which was more near making Miss
Vernon angry than anything she had encountered
in this house before.</p>

<p>"What does she sit there for, like a Chinese idol?"
said the captain. "She has a wonderful opinion
of herself, that old woman. Human nature may be
easy to see through, but it is very hard to understand,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_13" id="Page_13">[Pg 13]</a></span>
Catherine. What is that the Bible says about
'deceitful above all things'? When you try to get
hold of yourself, did you ever find a more slippery
customer? There's a kind of amusement in it, when
you are up to all your own dodges."</p>

<p>"Rowley, my dear!" said the old lady, surprised.</p>

<p>"It is true I am too old for slang: but one picks
it up, and sometimes it is happy enough. I say
when you are up to your own dodges; but that is
difficult, and takes a great deal of time. To find
yourself trotting forth the same old pretences that
you did at twenty, attempting to throw the same sort
of dust in your own eyes, is wonderful. There is a
sort of artlessness in the artifice that is amusing, as
you say; but it is only amusing when you are strong
enough to get the upper hand."</p>

<p>"When which of you gets the upper hand? for
there seem to be two of you," said Catherine, not
so much amused in her own person as she made a
pretence of being&mdash;for this was certainly not her view.</p>

<p>"To be sure," said the old captain, "there are two
of you, we all know that; and in most cases one of
you a very silly fellow, taken in on every hand, while
the other man sniggers in his sleeve. Of course I am
speaking from my own side&mdash;ladies may be different
from anything I know. But after all," he went on,
"I don't think so; for I've been a woman myself,
so to speak, through <i>her</i>, for sixty years&mdash;that is a
long spell. I don't see much difference, though in
some things she has got to the last word sooner
than I."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_14" id="Page_14">[Pg 14]</a></span></p>

<p>"I think we mean different things," said Catherine,
rising; "that was not the view I was taking. Yours
is better in the moral aspect, for I suppose it is more
profitable to judge ourselves than others; but one
cannot always be studying one's self."</p>

<p>There was a half-apology in her tone, and at the
same time a half-impatience. She did not desire to
be turned from the comedy which she had in her
way enjoyed for years, seeing through, as she said, all
the little world of dependents that hung about her,
drawing out their weaknesses, perceiving the bitter
grudge that lay under their exterior of smiles, and
the thousand ways in which they made up to themselves
for the humiliation of being in her debt&mdash;in
order to turn to what might prove the less amusing
contemplation of her own weaknesses, or recognise
the element of evil in that which was certainly not
amusing. Her carriage was standing at the gate
which admitted to the garden front of the Vernonry,
and it was with a sense of comfort that she got rid
of the old captain at his door, and threw a keen,
half-laughing glance at the windows on the other
side. Mr. Mildmay Vernon was making himself
very uncomfortable at the only angle of his room
which permitted him to see the gate, watching for
her exit. He kissed his hand to her as she paused
and looked round before getting into the carriage,
and Catherine realised as if she had seen it, the
snarl of mockery with which this salutation was
accompanied. In the intervening space were the
two sisters keeping the most vigilant watch for her<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_15" id="Page_15">[Pg 15]</a></span>
reappearance, counting the minutes which she spent
on the other side of the house, and saying ill-natured
things to each other as they nodded and waved their
hands. She was aware of the very tone in which
these speeches would be made, as well as if she had
heard them, and it gave her a great sense of enjoyment
to reflect that they were all sitting in rooms
well warmed and carefully kept, and full of benevolent
prevision of all their wants, while they thus
permitted themselves to sneer and snarl at the
bestower. Just as she drove away, Hester by chance
opened the verandah door, and came out to gather
some of the leaves of the Virginia creeper which
were dropping with every blast. Hester's serious
eyes met hers with scarcely any greeting at all on
either side. Catherine did not know very well how
it was that this girl came into the comedy. Had
she been Harry's betrothed, Miss Vernon could
have understood it, and though she could not but
have felt the triumph of her old rival, yet it would
have added delightfully to the commonplace drama
in which everybody pursued their own mean ends
under high-sounding pretences. She would have
been able to smile at the commonplace young fellow
taken in by the delusion that he was loved for himself,
and laugh in the conviction that Harry's was
no deep affection to be wounded, but that he could
quite well take care of himself, and that between
these two it would be diamond cutting diamond.
But the present state of affairs she did not understand.
All that was amusing in it was the doubtless<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_16" id="Page_16">[Pg 16]</a></span>
unbounded disappointment of the scheming little
mother, who thus must find all her fine schemes
collapsing in her hands. She could not refrain from
mentioning the matter at dinner that evening, though
Edward had a little failed on the former occasion, in
that backing up of all her opinions and feelings
which she had been accustomed to expect from
him.</p>

<p>"I find there is to be no match such as that we
were speaking of," she said. "Harry has either
drawn back or he is refused. Perhaps it may be
that he has thought better of it," she added suddenly,
without premeditation, grudging, as perhaps was
natural, to let her young antagonist carry off the
honours of the day.</p>

<p>"I thought it was not quite so certain as people
seemed to believe."</p>

<p>"Do you mean that Harry would persevere?"</p>

<p>"I mean that she would accept him, Aunt
Catherine. She is not a girl, so far as I can judge,
of whom one could ever be so sure."</p>

<p>"In the name of wonder," cried out Miss Vernon,
"what does she expect? Good heavens! where is
she to get another such chance again? To refuse
Harry, for a girl in her position, is madness. Where
does she think she will get another such offer?
Upon my word," said Catherine, with a little laugh,
"I can scarcely help being sorry for her poor little
mother. Such a disappointment for Mrs. John&mdash;her
White House and her recovered 'position' that she
loves so dearly, and all her comforts&mdash;I could find<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_17" id="Page_17">[Pg 17]</a></span>
it in my heart to be very sorry for her," she said,
with another little laugh.</p>

<p>Edward gave a glance up at her from his plate,
on which he had the air of being intent. The young
man thought he saw through Catherine, as she
thought she saw through all the other inmates of
her little world. What he did see through was the
superficial badness which her position had made,
but he had not so much as a glimmering of the
other Catherine, the nobler creature who stood
behind; and though he smiled and assented, a
sensation of disgust came into his heart. He, too,
had his comedy of human nature, which secretly,
under cover of his complacency and agreement with
Catherine's opinion, he regarded with the bitterest
and angriest scorn. What an extraordinary shock
would it have been for his companion, who felt
herself to sit in the place of the audience, seeing
the puppets play their pranks upon the stage and
exhibit all their fooleries, to know that she herself
was the actor, turned outside in and seen through
in all her devices, to this boy whom she loved!</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_18" id="Page_18">[Pg 18]</a></span></p>




<h2><a name="CHAPTER_II" id="CHAPTER_II">CHAPTER XVIII.</a></h2>

<h3>A FAMILY PARTY.</h3>


<p>"A grandson of Captain Morgan! Well, that
is not much to meet us at our wedding dinner&mdash;at
least, if it is not our wedding dinner&mdash;Oh, I know
there was our state one, and we met all the old
fogies whom I detest!" cried Mrs. Algernon Merridew,
born Ellen Vernon; "but this is only the
second, and the second is quite as important as the
first. She should have asked the county first, to
introduce us properly&mdash;and then the town; but
Aunt Catherine is one of the people who never do
what's expected of them. Besides, I don't want to
meet her relations on the other side. They're nobodies.
She spends quantities of money upon them
which she has no business to do, seeing it's the
Vernons' money and not hers at all, if you come
to that."</p>

<p>"Come, Nell," said her husband with a laugh.
He was a dark young man, as was to be expected&mdash;seeing
that she was so fair a young woman&mdash;good-looking,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_19" id="Page_19">[Pg 19]</a></span>
with whiskers, which were the fashion in
those days, of a bushy blackness, and hair which
suggested pomade. "Come, Nell," he said, "strike
fair. Catherine Vernon does a great deal of good
with her money, and doesn't spare upon the Vernons&mdash;all
the town knows that."</p>

<p>"Oh no, she doesn't spare upon the Vernons&mdash;all
those useless old creatures that she has up there in
that horrid old-fashioned house! I think if she did
a little more for real relations, and left those old
fogies alone, it would be more like&mdash;&mdash; Expecting
one to call upon them, and take all sorts of trouble!
And look at poor old Harry kept with his nose at
his desk for ever."</p>

<p>"Poor old Harry is very lucky, I think. Fair
play is a jewel. If she doesn't do all you want,
who do you expect would?"</p>

<p>"You, of course!" cried Ellen, as was natural:
and they were so newly married that he thought it
very pretty; "that is the good of you; and if you
go in for Aunt Catherine too, when you know I
can't endure her&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Of course the good of me is to do whatever you
want," he said, with various honeymoon demonstrations;
"but as for going in for Aunt Catherine&mdash;you
must know this, Nelly, that I'm very proud of
being connected with Catherine Vernon. I have
heard of her all my life as a sort of goddess, you
know. You must not put me off it all at once&mdash;I
couldn't be put off it. There now, there's nothing
to look sulky about."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_20" id="Page_20">[Pg 20]</a></span></p>

<p>"You are such an old Redborough person," Ellen
said, with a little pout: which was very true. He
was not, indeed, at all a good match for a Vernon;
but his whiskers&mdash;things much admired in those days&mdash;and
her self-will had worsted all opposition. He
was no more than the son of the perfectly respectable
and very well-to-do solicitor, who was universally
respected in Redborough, and though Algernon had
been in town and sown his wild oats, he had never
entirely got out of his mind the instinctive conviction
that Redborough was the centre of the world;
and to feel himself within the charmed circle in
which Catherine Vernon moved was a promotion
which was intoxicating to the young man. Not
even his devotion to his pretty wife, which was
great, could bring him to disown that allegiance
to Catherine Vernon which every Redborough man
was born with. It was a sort of still more intoxicating
proof of the dignity he had come to, that the
pretty wife herself turned up her little nose at
Catherine. That Mrs. Algernon should be so
familiar with the highest excellence known to
them, as to venture to do this, was to the whole
family of the Merridews an admiration&mdash;just as a
family entirely loyal might be flattered by having
a princess among them who should permit herself to
laugh at the majesty of the king; but this did not
shake their own fidelity. And Algernon, though he
ventured with bated breath to say "Aunt Catherine"
when he spoke of her in his own family, had not
got over his veneration for Miss Vernon. He had<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_21" id="Page_21">[Pg 21]</a></span>
taken her in to dinner on the occasion of the great
banquet, which Ellen described so lightly, with a
sensation bordering upon the hysterical. Rapture,
and pride, and panic were in it. He did not know,
according to the vulgar description, whether he were
on his head or his heels, and his voice made a
buzzing in his own ears as he talked. The second
time was to be in the intimacy of the domestic
circle&mdash;if it had been to meet a crossing-sweeper it
would still have been a bewildering gratification;
but all the more, his wife's criticism and her indifference,
and even discontent with the notice which
to him seemed so overpowering an honour, pleased
the young man. She felt herself every bit as good
as Catherine, and yet she was his&mdash;Mrs. Algernon
Merridew! The thought was one adapted to make
his head swim with pride and delight.</p>

<p>It was entirely a family party, as Catherine had
said, and a very small one. The Miss Vernon-Ridgways
had been invited, to make the number even,
and their preparations for the unusual honour had
taken up four days at least. When they sailed into
the drawing-room at the Grange, having spent ten
minutes in shaking out the flounces and arranging
the flowers and ribbons with which they were ornamented,
it would be impossible to attempt to describe
the disgust of the bride. She turned her eyes upon
her husband, who for his part was in a state of
beatitude not to be disturbed by trifles, with a look
of indignant rage which he did not understand. "To
think she should ask those old things to meet <i>us!</i><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_22" id="Page_22">[Pg 22]</a></span>
I declare I have a great mind to go right away," she
whispered to Harry, who was more sympathetic.
Harry allowed that it was almost beyond bearing.
"But I wouldn't make a quarrel if I were you," he
said. In the meantime the sisters went up beaming
to their dear Catherine, whom they kissed with
devotion. How well she was looking! how becoming
her dress was! but that lovely lace would be becoming
to any one! they cried. Catherine received all
these compliments with a smile, and she took great
pleasure in Ellen's disgust, and the way in which she
turned her ear instead of her cheek to the salutations
of the cousins, who were rapturous in their admiration
of her in all her bridal finery. The entry of the
stranger, who was unknown to any of them, made a
diversion. Roland Ashton, when he was visible in
the full light of Miss Vernon's drawing-room, turned
out, in appearance at least, a very valuable addition
to the society. Ellen, who was critical, and inclined
by nature to a poor opinion of old Captain Morgan's
grandson, looked at him with astonished, and indeed
reluctant, approval. His whiskers were not so thick
or so black as Algernon's; but he had a fine mass of
dark hair, wavy, and rather longer than is now permitted
by fashion, fine features and dark eyes, with
a paleness which was considered very interesting in
those days. He was much taller and of more imposing
aspect than Edward, whose stature was not
great; he was far more intellectual than Harry;
altogether of the four young men present, his was
no doubt the most noticeable figure. They all<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_23" id="Page_23">[Pg 23]</a></span>
appraised him mentally as he came in&mdash;Catherine
first of all, with a sensation of pride that the one
individual who was her relation, without being the
relation of her family, was a creditable novelty to introduce
among them; the others, with various degrees
of quickened curiosity and grudging. The grudge was
intensified in the persons of the sisters, who could
not endure this interloper. They had felt it their
duty to draw the line at the Morgans long ago, and
it was all they could do to behave with propriety at
Catherine's table when they were seated beside the
descendant of the old people on whom Catherine
spent her money in what they felt to be an entirely
unjustifiable way. They were the only persons present
who kept up their grudge to the end. In
Ellen's case it disappeared with the clear perception
of his good looks. But when Mr. Ashton offered his
arm to Miss Matilda Vernon-Ridgway, the look with
which she received the offered courtesy was enough
to freeze any adventurous young man into stone.
It did not, however. It made him all but laugh as
he glanced at Catherine, who for her part contemplated
her cousins with much gratification. Miss
Matilda placed the end of her finger upon the young
man's arm. She kept at as great a distance as
possible as she crossed the hall by his side. To the
little speech about the weather, which he thought
it his duty to make her, she returned a sort of
inarticulate reply&mdash;a monosyllable, but conveying no
meaning. When she was seated at table she flung
herself, so to speak, upon her neighbour at the other<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_24" id="Page_24">[Pg 24]</a></span>
side, who, as it happened, was Harry Vernon, and
who was not prepared for the honour. All this was
to Catherine as good as a play.</p>

<p>"What a climate, and what a poky old place this
Redborough is," said Ellen, preparing to lead the
conversation, as she finished her soup. She spoke
apparently to Edward, but in reality to the company,
which was not too large for general conversation.
"It is dreadful to come back here in the beginning
of winter from Abroad. I declare I quite envy you,
you people who have never been Abroad; you don't
know the difference. Bright sunshine all day long,
and bands playing, and the best of music, and all
your friends to talk to, sitting out under the trees.
Compare that with Redborough, where, beyond a
few tiresome little dinner parties, and perhaps three
dances at Christmas&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"The White House used to be a great addition to
the cheerfulness of the place," said Edward. "Harry
will have no heart to keep it up by himself now you
have left him."</p>

<p>"Oh, Harry shall marry," said Ellen, "I have
made up my mind to that; and as soon as we have
got quite settled, I mean to set things a-going. I
mean to have a Thursday, Aunt Catherine. We
shall be glad if you'll come. It is to be a <i>Th&eacute;
Dansante</i>, which is quite a novelty here. You learn
so much better about all these things Abroad."</p>

<p>"Where is Abroad?" said Roland, in an undertone
which was so confidential and intimate, that
had he been anybody else, Miss Matilda must have<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_25" id="Page_25">[Pg 25]</a></span>
yielded to its seduction. As it was, she only gave
him a look of surprise at his ignorance, and cleared
her throat and shook her bracelets in order to be
able to strike in.</p>

<p>"A <i>Th&eacute; Dansante</i> is exactly the kind of entertainment
that suits me," Catherine said.</p>

<p>"Yes, won't it be nice?" said Ellen, unconscious.
"I learnt all the figures of the <i>cotillion</i>, which is the
most amusing thing to end up with, and I made Algy
learn it. As soon as ever our house is ready we shall
start. It will be a new feature in society. As for
Harry, till he's married he'll have to be content with
bachelor's dinners, for I can't always be leaving Algy
to look after him."</p>

<p>Here Harry murmured something, stammering,
and with a blush, to the intent that the bachelor's
dinners would last a long time.</p>

<p>"We don't see you so often at our place as we used
to do, Mr. Harry," said Miss Matilda, sweetly. "It
used to be quite a pleasure to watch for you; and
the summer evenings were so tempting, weren't they?
Oh, fie! it is very naughty to love and to ride away.
We always said that was what was likely to happen,
didn't we?" she said to her sister, on the other side
of the table.</p>

<p>Miss Martha nodded and smiled in return, and
cried&mdash;</p>

<p>"Oh, always," in a shriller tone.</p>

<p>"What's that you thought likely to happen?
Then it didn't happen if it was Harry," cried Ellen,
instinctively, ranging herself on her brother's side.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_26" id="Page_26">[Pg 26]</a></span></p>

<p>"But about this <i>cotillion</i>?" said Edward. "What
is it? I thought it had something to say to a lady's
dress. I am sure it had in the eighteenth century.
We shall have to go to school to learn what your
novelty means."</p>

<p>"She put me to school, I can tell you," cried
Algernon, from the other end of the table. "I had
to work! She is the most dreadful little tyrant,
though she looks so soft."</p>

<p>"Dancing is neglected shamefully nowadays," said
Miss Matilda; "shamefully! We were taught very
differently. Don't you remember, dear, Mousheer
D'Egmont and his little violin, Martha? we were
taught the minuet first on account of our
curtseys&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Oh, the funny, old-fashioned thing! You <i>never</i>
curtsey nowadays; even in the Lancers it is only a
bob," said Ellen, "or a bend mostly with your head.
You never see such a thing nowadays."</p>

<p>"My dear! In the presence of your sovereign,"
said Miss Matilda, with dignity, "it <i>always</i> continues
necessary. There is no change in that respect so far
as I am aware, Martha, is there? You were in the
habit of attending Drawing-rooms longer than I."</p>

<p>"Oh, never any change in that!" cried Miss
Martha, rising upon herself, so to speak, and erecting
her head as she looked from one end of the table
to another. It was not often that they had such a
triumph. They had been Presented. They had
made their curtseys to their Sovereign, as Miss
Matilda said.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_27" id="Page_27">[Pg 27]</a></span></p>

<p>Silence fell upon the table, only broken by the
jingle of Ellen's bracelets, which she pushed up her
arm in her mortification; and there were so many of
them that they made a considerable noise. Even
she was cowed for the moment; and what was worse
was, that her husband being simple-minded, and
getting a little familiar with Catherine, now turned
his looks of awe and veneration upon the Miss
Vernon-Ridgways, who were so well acquainted with
the court and its ways.</p>

<p>And Catherine laughed.</p>

<p>"We are all behind in that respect," she said. "I
am fond of pomp and ceremonial for my part. It
is a pretty thing, but I like it best at a distance.
It is my fault, I have no doubt, that your wife
is ignorant of Drawing-rooms, Mr. Merridew."</p>

<p>"I always said so, Aunt Catherine," cried Ellen,
who was ready to cry, in the midst of her triumph.
"It is horrid for girls to have relations with those
out-of-the-way notions."</p>

<p>Catherine only laughed; it was her habitual
comment. She turned smiling to young Ashton by
her side.</p>

<p>"You ought not to dislike state," he said, in an
undertone; "you who are a kind of queen yourself&mdash;or,
shall I say, grand duchess&mdash;in your own town?"</p>

<p>"A queen without any subjects," said Catherine,
shaking her head. This time she did not laugh,
and there was even a little glimmer of sadness in
her eyes.</p>

<p>"Not so. I am a stranger, you know. When I<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_28" id="Page_28">[Pg 28]</a></span>
go about the town, I hear of nothing but Catherine
Vernon. They call you so, do you know&mdash;<i>tout court</i>,
without miss or madam&mdash;that has a great effect upon
one's imagination."</p>

<p>Young Merridew had thrust forward his head, and
was listening, which perhaps was not very good
manners.</p>

<p>"It is quite true," he said eagerly. "Ellen says I
am a very Redborough person. I have been born
and bred here. I can't remember the time when
I didn't look up to&mdash;her, as if she was something
above the human&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"And yet you have married a Vernon!" said
Catherine; but she was pleased. "It is not an uncommon
thing in this world," she said. "People at
a distance think more kindly of one than those who
are near; but this is not talk for a dinner-table.
Not to interfere with Ellen's <i>cotillion</i>" she said, in a
louder tone, "I am thinking of a party for Christmas,
young people. As it is for you, you must lay your
heads together, and decide what it is to be."</p>

<p>Then there arose a flutter of talk, chiefly maintained
by the ladies, but in which young Merridew
was appealed to by his wife; and Harry, stimulated
by the same hand, and Edward, mindful of his duties,
took part.</p>

<p>Catherine and her young relative were left, as it
were, alone, amid the babble of tongues.</p>

<p>"I cannot allow myself to look at it gravely," she
said. "I laugh; it is the best way. They all take
what they can get, but their opinions, if they were<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_29" id="Page_29">[Pg 29]</a></span>
individually weighed, of Catherine Vernon, would
surprise you. They don't think much of me. I dare
say I quite deserve it," she said, after a pause, with
another laugh. "Don't you think that in most cases
enthusiasm is confined to those people who personally
know the least of the object of it? That's an
awkward sentence, but never mind."</p>

<p>"Isn't it the same thing as to say that a great man
is never a hero to his valet, or that a prophet has no
honour in his own country?"</p>

<p>"Not the last, at least," said Catherine; "for being
no prophet, you yourself say I have got some honour
in my country. As for the valet, I don't know," she
continued, "but a maid, though she appraises you at
your true value, and is convinced you are a fool in
many things, still is not without a prejudice in your
favour. She would like, though she maintains her
erect position, to see the rest of the world bow down
before you. That is amusing too."</p>

<p>"You are a philosopher," said the stranger, looking
at her with a tender regard in his eyes, which
made a great impression generally upon younger
women, and moved even Catherine as with a sense
of kindness&mdash;of kindness disproportioned to their
actual knowledge of each other, which is a thing
which conciliates everybody, looking as if it implied
a particular attraction.</p>

<p>"Your grandfather thinks me a cynic," she said.
She liked these few words of quiet talk in the midst
of the mingled voices of the others, and was grateful
to the young man who looked so sympathetic. "I<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_30" id="Page_30">[Pg 30]</a></span>
don't know that I am a cynic, but rather than cry, I
prefer to laugh. Is that cynicism?" He gave her
a look which would have no doubt had a great effect
upon the heart of a younger woman, and which
pleased Catherine, old as she was.</p>

<p>"I think it is true philosophy; but some of us
have feelings that will not be laughed at," said
Roland. He was accustomed to make great use of
his fine eyes, and on this occasion he did so with
the greatest effect. There could not have been
more tender sympathy than was in them. Could
he be really so much impressed by her character and
position, and the failure of true gratitude and kindness?
Catherine Vernon would probably have
laughed at any one else of her own age who had
been so easily persuaded; but it is always so much
more easy to believe in the sincerity of affection
which is called forth by one's self! Her eyes softened
as she looked at him.</p>

<p>"I think you and I, Roland, are going to be great
friends," she said, and then turned with a slight
little sigh, so small as to be almost imperceptible,
to the louder voices appealing to her. "You must
settle it among you," she said. "I give Edward
<i>carte blanche</i>. The only thing is that it must take in
everybody, all the Vernonry and our neighbours as
well&mdash;a real Christmas party."</p>

<p>"Oh, don't you think, Aunt Catherine, Christmas
is such a bore!" said Ellen, "and family parties! Let
us have strangers. Let us have people we never set
eyes on before. Christmas is so vulgar! Look at<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_31" id="Page_31">[Pg 31]</a></span>
all the newspapers with their little stories; the
snow on the ground and the wanderer coming home,
and so forth. I am so glad we haven't got a
wanderer to come home."</p>

<p>"Christmas brings a great many duties I am
sure," said Miss Matilda. "Have you seen the
charity flannel at Roby's, Catherine? It is so good,
almost good enough to wear one's self; and the
blankets really look like blankets, not horse-cloths.
Do you think that is good or bad? What you give
in charity ought to be different, don't you think?
not to let them suppose they have a right&mdash;"</p>

<p>"You forget," said her sister, eager to get in a
word, "that dear Catherine always gives the best."</p>

<p>"Ah! it is well to be Catherine," said Miss
Matilda, "but many people think there should be a
difference. What do you think, Mr. Harry? Catherine
may consider poor people's feelings; but there
are some who think it is wrong to do so&mdash;for who is
like Catherine? She is always giving. She is
always so considerate. Whatever she does is sure
to be the best way."</p>

<p>"I am certain," said Algernon Merridew beaming
with honest loyalty from where he sat by Miss
Vernon's side, "that all Redborough is of that
opinion; and Redborough ought to know."</p>

<p>"You mean all but the people to whom I give,"
said Catherine, "there are not so many of them:
but they are the best judges of all, and I don't think
they approve."</p>

<p>"There's nobody so unreasonable as the poor,"<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_32" id="Page_32">[Pg 32]</a></span>
said Ellen, "they are never satisfied. You should
just see them turning over the pieces from my
kitchen. Of course all the pieces are quite nice;
everything is, I hope, where I am housekeeper. Oh,
I know I am extravagant, I like the best of everything;
but nothing satisfies the poor. Cold potatoes
now with mayonnaise sauce are what I adore, but
<i>they</i> throw them away."</p>

<p>"Perhaps they don't have the mayonnaise sauce?"
suggested Edward.</p>

<p>"Oh, goodness! I hope not; that would be
simply immoral," cried Miss Matilda. "But, Mr.
Harry, you don't give your opinion, none of the
gentlemen give their opinion. Perhaps that is
because money is what they give, and one shilling
is just like another. You can't have charity shillings.
Oh, but I approve of charity flannel; and
some people always like to make a difference in
what they give to the poor. Poor ladies and gentlemen
soon find that out, I assure you. People give
you useful presents. If they want to invite you,
they invite you when there's nobody there. They
think a family dinner or high tea quite treat
enough for you. And quite right, don't you think,
when one is in the position of a dependent? It
keeps people in their proper places. Dear Catherine
buys the best flannel, better than I can afford,
for her Christmas gifts. She is never like other
people, always more liberal; but I should buy the
whitey-brown, that is, if I could afford any at all
you know."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_33" id="Page_33">[Pg 33]</a></span></p>

<p>"Don't attack me, Matilda," said Catherine, with
a laugh, "all along the line."</p>

<p>"Oh, attack! <i>you</i>, dear Catherine? not for the
world. We all know what a friend you are. What
should we do without you? Whether we are in
Paris fashions or our old silks, don't we owe it all
to you?"</p>

<p>There was a little pause round the table which
was somewhat awkward; for what could anybody
say? The clever ones were all non-plussed, but
Harry, who was the stolid one, suddenly became
audible with his round rolling bass voice. "Whoever
says that, and whether it was well meant or not, I
say the same. It's all quite true. We owe everything
to Aunt Catherine. I am always ready to say
so, wherever I go."</p>

<p>"Have we come to Christmas toasts already?"
said Edward intervening. "We had better not start
that sort of thing before the time. We all know
what we owe to Aunt Catherine."</p>

<p>"Hush, hush," she cried, waving her hand to him
as she rose. "Now we shall release your noble
intellects from the necessity of coming down to our
level," Catherine said as she followed carefully Miss
Matilda's long train. It was very long, though it
was rather flimsy, and the progress of the ladies was
impeded by it. Ellen swept out lightly in advance
with a perfect command of hers. It was the first
time she had preceded the old cousins in her dignity
as a married woman, and the ring of her bracelets
sounded like a little trumpet-note. As she followed<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_34" id="Page_34">[Pg 34]</a></span>
them out Catherine Vernon returned to her habitual
mood of amused indulgence. She had been almost
sentimental for a moment, she said to herself, beguiled
by that boy's sympathetic eyes, which no doubt
he must make great use of among the young ones.
She laughed at herself not unpleasantly, to think of
the confidences she had almost been beguiled into.
But it pleased her to think that it was her mother's
blood which had exercised this influence upon her.
After all, it might be the Vernons only who were
sordid and ungrateful. The old captain and his wife
had always been exceptions to her sweeping judgment
of human nature. And now it was their
descendant who had touched her heart. Perhaps it
was only the Vernonry after all. But she was fully
restored to her usual kind of amusement as she
watched the progress of her three companions into
a temporary but eager intimacy on the score of
Ellen's Paris fashions which they were eager to examine.
The bride was as eager to exhibit as they
were to see, and was so well pleased with herself
as to be impervious to the little covert blows which
Miss Matilda gave under the shield of her flatteries.
Catherine Vernon established herself in her own
chair, and gathered her costly silken skirts about
her, and took up the newspaper, which people in the
country have to read in the evening instead of the
morning; but she did not read much. She was
diverted by the talk. "Crinoline is certainly going
out," said Ellen. "I heard it from the very best
shops. Look at mine, it is quite small, hardly to be<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_35" id="Page_35">[Pg 35]</a></span>
called crinoline at all. This is the very newest, from
the Grangd Magaseens du Louvre. You see yours
are twice as big," Ellen added, making a little
pirouette to exhibit the diminished proportions of
her hoops. The Miss Vernon-Ridgways looked down
upon their own skirts with unquiet eyes.</p>

<p>"The French are always so exaggerated," said
Miss Matilda. "Ignorant persons have such strange
ideas. They think really nice people in England
take their fashions straight out of Paris, but that is
quite a mistake. It has always to be modified by
English good taste&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>Ellen interrupted with a little shriek. "Oh, good
taste! You should just hear how they speak of that
Abroad. Sometimes I could have cried. They say
no woman knows how to dress herself in England.
And when I come back and see the dreadful things
that are worn here&mdash;&mdash; This is pretty," Ellen continued,
drawing attention to a portion of her dress.
"The Empress wore one just the same at a ball."</p>

<p>"Dear Ellen," said Miss Matilda, "and you wear
it at a little family party! that shows the difference.
I am sure it was done just to please us, to let us see
what the new fashions are, in your unselfish way,
dear!"</p>

<p>And Catherine laughed behind the newspaper.
The honours of the occasion were to the old sisters
after all.</p>

<p>In the meantime conversation of much more
serious import, though scarcely more elevated, was
going on round the table in the dining-room, where<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_36" id="Page_36">[Pg 36]</a></span>
young Ashton had got the lead, though none of the
others looked upon him with over-favourable eyes.
There was no doubt that he was a very handsome
fellow, and both Harry and Edward had that instinctive
sense that he was a competitor likely to
put them on their mettle, which is supposed to
influence the bosoms of women alone. They thought
(instinctively, and each in their different ways,) that
he must be a coxcomb. They divined that he was
the sort of fellow whom women admired, and scorned
him for it&mdash;as women perhaps now and then indulge
in a little sneer at a gentleman's beauty. But by
and by he touched a chord which vibrated more or
less in all their bosoms. He began to talk of the
city, for which country men of business have a
natural reverence. He revealed to them that he
himself was on the Stock Exchange, and incidentally
let fall an anecdote here and there, of the marvellous
incidents, the fairy tales of commerce, that were
taking place in those magic regions every day: of
men who woke in the morning with the most
moderate means at their command, and before night
were millionaires. They gathered close about him
as he added anecdote to anecdote. Edward Vernon
was like tinder, prepared for the fire; for all his
thoughts for some time past had been directed in
that way. And young Merridew was launching forth
upon life, rather more lavishly than was consistent
with his income and prospects. Harry was the least
interested of the three, but even to him the idea of
making a fortune in a few hours and being able to<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_37" id="Page_37">[Pg 37]</a></span>
retire to the country to give himself up to dogs and
horses, instead of going down to the bank every
morning, was a beatific suggestion. The present
writer does not pretend to be able to inform the
reader exactly how it was, or in favour of which
schemes, that the poet of the Stock Exchange
managed to influence these rustic imaginations, but
he did so. He filled their minds with an impatience
of their own slow business and its mild percentages,
even when he seemed to praise it.</p>

<p>"Perhaps it does feel slow work; I can't say.
I think it is a vast deal more wholesome. It is
very hard to keep your head steady, you know, when
you feel that the chances of an hour or two may
make you the richest man in England."</p>

<p>"Or the poorest perhaps?" said Edward, more
with the idea of subduing himself than checking this
flow of instruction.</p>

<p>"Ye-es," said Ashton, indifferently, "no doubt
that's on the cards: but it ought not to be if your
broker has a head on his shoulders. About the
worst that can happen, if you take proper precautions,
is that you're no worse than you were to
start with, and better luck next time. I don't
approve the 'gain or lose it all' system. But what
will Miss Vernon say if we stay here talking shop
all the evening?" he added.</p>

<p>There was never a more clever conclusion; it was
like the exciting close of an act in the theatre, for
he could not be persuaded to begin again. When
they went reluctantly into the drawing-room, Ellen<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_38" id="Page_38">[Pg 38]</a></span>
thought her Algernon had taken too much wine;
and even Edward, who never offended the proprieties
in any way, had a curious light in his eyes, and did
not hear when he was spoken to. But Catherine
Vernon, for her part, did not notice anything except
the filial kindness of young Roland, and the
sympathy and understanding which shone in his
eyes.</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_39" id="Page_39">[Pg 39]</a></span></p>




<h2><a name="CHAPTER_III" id="CHAPTER_III">CHAPTER XIX.</a></h2>

<h3>CONFIDENCES.</h3>


<p>"I would not speculate if I were you," said
Ashton. "What would be the good? You are
very well off as you are. You are making your
fortune steadily, far better than if you did it by a
successful <i>coup</i>. Yes, yes, I can understand that a
man should desire a little more excitement, and
rebel against the monotony of a quiet life, but not
you, Vernon, if you'll excuse my saying so. You
don't go in for any sort of illegitimate pursuit. You
don't play or bet; you have no claim upon you that
you want extraordinary means of supplying&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"How can you tell all that?" said Edward
Vernon. "Do you think life's so easy a business
that you can read it off from the surface, and make
sure that everything is as it seems?"</p>

<p>"I don't say that. Of course, I go upon appearances.
I can understand that perhaps you are
tired of it&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Tired of it!" He twirled his stick violently
in his hand, hitting at the rusty bramble branches<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_40" id="Page_40">[Pg 40]</a></span>
and gorse bushes that bordered the Common as if
they were his enemies. "I suppose one is apt to
tire of anything that lasts and never varies," he cried
with a forced laugh. "Yes, I am tired of it. Quiet
life and safe business, and the hope of making a
fortune, as you call it, steadily, in twenty or thirty
years&mdash;&mdash;Good life! Twenty or thirty years! Only
think of the number of days in that, one after the
other, one exactly like the other. I begin to feel as
if I should welcome anything to break the monotony&mdash;crime
itself."</p>

<p>"That means, old fellow," said Ashton, soothingly,
"nerves, and nothing more."</p>

<p>Edward laughed out, a laugh which was not
harmonious with the soft dulness of the autumnal
atmosphere. "I have no nerves, nor tastes nor
inclinations, nor any mind of my own," he said.
"I do what it is the right thing to do. Though
I am sick of it, I never show that. Nobody here
has the slightest idea that I was ever impatient or
irritable or weary in my life."</p>

<p>Ashton looked at him with some curiosity, but
took no further notice. "Does Miss Vernon," he
said, "take any share in the business of the bank&mdash;I
mean, in the work, in the regulations?"</p>

<p>"Miss Vernon," said Edward, "takes a share in
everything that is going on around her, it does not
matter what. She has been so long used to be at
the head of everything, that she thinks it her
natural place; and, as she is old and a woman, it
stands to reason&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_41" id="Page_41">[Pg 41]</a></span></p>

<p>"But she is a very intelligent woman; and she
must have a great deal of experience."</p>

<p>"The experience of a little country town, and of
steady business, as you call it&mdash;oh, she has all that.
But put your own views before her, or suggest even
the advantages of the circulation of money, quick
turning over, and balance of losses and gains&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"I can understand that," said Ashton, "You
don't appreciate the benefits of the Conservative
element, Vernon. But for you and your steady-going
banks, how could we operate at all? The
money must be somewhere. We can't play with
counters only in this game."</p>

<p>"There was no question of counters," said Edward;
"we have the money in our hands. It seems to me
that you and I should change places: you to do the
steady business here, and please Aunt Catherine&mdash;who
has taken a great fancy to you, you must know&mdash;I,
to watch the tide, how it comes and how it goes."</p>

<p>"There might be worse arrangements," Ashton
said with a laugh: but he added quickly, meeting a
keen, sudden glance from Edward, "if you could
transfer to me your training, and I mine to you. I
am counted rather bold sometimes, you must know,"
he added, after a moment, returning that look. They
talked with great apparent readiness and openness,
but with a curious dread of mutual observation
going on under the current of their talk all the time.</p>

<p>"So much the better," said Edward, "so long as
you know when to hold in."</p>

<p>They were going along the side of the Common<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_42" id="Page_42">[Pg 42]</a></span>
between the Grange and the Vernonry. It was
Sunday afternoon&mdash;a dull day, the sky hanging low,
the green parts of the Common very green, glistening
with wetness, the gorse and brushwood very brown
and faded. Nobody was about on this day of leisure.
Even the slow country cart, the farmer's shandry,
the occasional roll of a carriage, was absent from the
silent road. There were no nursemaids and children
from Redborough picking their way along the side
path. Captain Morgan, feeling his rheumatism, had
retired to his chimney corner; the young men had it
all to themselves. Ashton had been lunching at the
Grange. He was on the eve of going back to town
to business, from which he declared he had been
absent far too long. The object of his visit was not
very clear to any one: he had left his grandparents
for years without showing so much interest in them.
But, whatever his motive had been, his expedition
had not been without fruit. He had discovered a new
and wealthy vein well worth working, and lit a fire
which, no doubt, would light up still further illuminations,
in some inflammable spirits. No one had
received him more warmly than Edward Vernon,
but he was less easy to make out than the others.
He was less simple; his life did not correspond with
the betrayals of his conversation, whereas neither
Harry Vernon nor his brother-in-law, had anything
to betray. What was evident, at least, was
that Catherine Vernon smiled upon the acquaintance
which had been formed so rapidly between
her nephew and the stranger. She called Edward<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_43" id="Page_43">[Pg 43]</a></span>
"your cousin" to Ashton, then laughed and apologised,
explaining that where there were so many
cousins it was difficult to remember that her relation
was not Edward's too. When Ashton replied, "There
is connection enough to justify the name, if it is
agreeable to Vernon," there could be no doubt that
it was, at least, agreeable to her. She smiled upon
them from her window as they went out together,
waving her hand. And no foolish mother could have
been more unaware than Catherine, that the knowledge
that she was there, watching with tender looks
of affection the two figures as they went along, was
to Edward irksome beyond expression. He felt no
charm of love in the look, but substituted suspicion
for tenderness, and believed that she was watching
them, keeping them in sight as far as her eyes could
carry, to spy out all they did, and make for herself
an explanation of every gesture. He would not even
have twirled his stick and cut down the brambles
but in a momentary fit of forgetfulness. When they
got beyond her range, he breathed more freely, but,
even then, was not without a recollection that she
had her opera-glasses at hand, and might, through
them, be watching his demeanour still.</p>

<p>"Let us go this way," he said, turning into the
road, which slanted away on the nearer side of the
Vernonry, leading out into the open country and
brown fields.</p>

<p>Ashton hesitated a moment. "I am not sure that
I am not expected at home. It is my last day,"
he said.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_44" id="Page_44">[Pg 44]</a></span></p>

<p>"Home is a kind of irons," said Edward, "hand-cuffs,
ankle chains. One is always like an unhappy
cockatoo on a perch. Any little attempt at flight is
always pulled back."</p>

<p>"I don't think that is my experience. My old
people are very indulgent; but then, I am a mere
visitor. Home does not mean much to me," said
Ashton. If he had been in the presence of any lady
he would have sighed as he said this&mdash;being in
absolute freedom with one of his own kind he smiled,
and it was Edward who sighed.</p>

<p>"There is such a thing as having too much of it,"
he said. "What I suffer from is want of air. Don't
you perceive it? There is no atmosphere; every
breath has been breathed over and over again. We
want ventilation. We welcome every horror with
delight in consequence&mdash;a murder&mdash;or even a big
bankruptcy. I suppose that is why bankruptcies are
so common," he added, as if struck with the idea. "A
man requires a great deal of original impulse before
he will go the length of murder. The other has a
milder but similar attraction; you ruin other people,
which shakes them up, and gives a change of air."</p>

<p>"Ill-omened words," said Ashton, laughing, and
throwing out the fore-finger and little finger of his
right hand with a play at superstition. "Ugly at all
times, but especially when we are talking of business
and the Stock Exchange."</p>

<p>"Are you aware," said Edward, sinking his voice,
"that our predecessor, before Aunt Catherine, did
something of the kind?"</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_45" id="Page_45">[Pg 45]</a></span></p>

<p>"Who was he?"</p>

<p>"A certain John Vernon. His wife lives yonder,
with the rest of Aunt Catherine's dependents in that
red house. He found it too much for him; but it
was a poor sort of a flash in the pan, and hurt
nobody but himself."</p>

<p>"You would like to do more than that," said
Ashton, with a laugh.</p>

<p>But in Edward's face there was no jest.</p>

<p>"I should like," he said, "if I broke down, to
carry the whole concern along with me. I should
like to pull it down about their ears as Samson
pulled the temple, you know, upon his persecutors."</p>

<p>"Vernon," said Roland, "do you know that you
are very rash, opening out like this to me? Don't
you see it is quite possible I might betray you? I
have no right to preach, but surely you can't have
any reason to be so bitter. You seem tremendously
well off, I can tell you, to a friendless fellow
like me."</p>

<p>"I am very well off," said Edward, with a smile;
"no man was ever better. I came out of a struggling
family where I was to have gone to the colonies
or something. My next brother got that chance,
and here I am. John Vernon, so far as I can hear,
was an extravagant fool. I have not the least
sympathy with that. Money's a great power, but as
for fine houses, or fine furniture, or show or dash
as they call it&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"I told you," said Ashton, "you have no vice."</p>

<p>Edward gave him a dark, suspicious look.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_46" id="Page_46">[Pg 46]</a></span></p>

<p>"I have even a contempt for it," he said.</p>

<p>"There are plenty of men who have that&mdash;a horror
even; and yet can't do without the excitement."</p>

<p>"I prefer your sort of excitement. John Vernon,
as I say, was a fool. He ran away, poor wretch, and
Catherine stepped in, and re-made everything, and
covered him with contempt."</p>

<p>"He is the father (is he dead?) of the&mdash;young
lady&mdash;who is such a favourite with my grandfather?"</p>

<p>"Hester? Oh, you know her, do you? One of
Aunt Catherine's pensioners in the Vernonry, as
she calls it."</p>

<p>"It is a little hard upon them to be called dependents;
my old people live there. They have their
own little income to live upon. Miss Vernon gives
them their house, I believe, which is very kind, but
not enough to justify the name of pensioners."</p>

<p>"That is our way here," said Edward laughing.
"We are very ready to give, but we like to take the
good of it. It is not respectful to call the place the
Vernonry, but we do it. We are delighted to be
kind; the more you will take from us, the better we
will like you. We even&mdash;rather like you to be
ungrateful. It satisfies our theory."</p>

<p>"Vernon, all that seems to me to be diabolical,
you know, I wish you wouldn't. Miss Hester is a
little of your way of thinking, I fear. She makes it
amusing though. There are parties, it appears,
where she stands all night in a corner, or looks
at photographs."</p>

<p>"She says that, does she?" said Edward. His<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_47" id="Page_47">[Pg 47]</a></span>
smile had not been a pleasant one, but now it
disappeared from his face. "And I suppose she tells
you that I never go near her? I have to look after
the old ladies and take them to supper. I have
the honour of standing in the position of master of
the house."</p>

<p>"I don't know that she blames any one," said Ashton
indifferently. "It is more fun than anger. Talk
of want of air, Vernon; that poor child wants air
if you please. She is as full of spirit and life as any
one I ever saw. She would like to do something."</p>

<p>"Something! What kind of something? Go on
the stage&mdash;or what?"</p>

<p>"I have never heard of the stage or anything of
the kind. She wants work."</p>

<p>"Excitement!" Edward said, with an impatient
gleam in his eyes.</p>

<p>"She is like you then," said Ashton, trying to
laugh, but not with much cordiality, for he felt
himself growing angry in spite of himself.</p>

<p>There was excitement enough now in Edward
Vernon's face. It grew dark with passion and
intolerance.</p>

<p>"A woman is altogether different," he said; then
subduing himself with a change in his voice from
rage to scorn, "she will soon have it in her power
to change all that. Don't you know she is going to
marry Harry Vernon?&mdash;an excellent match for her&mdash;money
and little brains&mdash;whereas she has much
brains and little money, the very thing in marriage,"
he concluded, with a harsh laugh.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_48" id="Page_48">[Pg 48]</a></span></p>

<p>"Is that so?" said Ashton.</p>

<p>He had been listening quite at his ease, turning
his face towards his companion, and it was a
satisfaction to Edward to see that the stranger's
countenance clouded over. He was astonished, and
Edward could not help hoping more than astonished&mdash;for
being sore and bitter himself he liked to see
another feel the sting.</p>

<p>"That's well," Roland said after a moment, "if
she likes it. I should not have thought&mdash;but a
week's acquaintance does not show you much of a
character. I am glad to hear it," he said, after a
pause, "if she likes it," which was but a dubious
sort of satisfaction after all.</p>

<p>Edward looked at him again with an expression of
gratified feeling. He was glad to have given his
new friend a little friendly stab. It pleased him to
see Roland wince. When one is very uneasy one's self,
that is always a little consolation. He looked at
him and enjoyed it, then turned away from the
subject which had given him this momentary
pleasure.</p>

<p>"Let us return to our muttons," he said. "Tell
me what you think of these papers? I put them
into my pocket to show you. Now that we are
fairly out of sight"&mdash;then he turned back to glance
along the still damp road, upon which there was not
a single shadow but their own&mdash;"and nobody can
spy upon us&mdash;for I distrust windows&mdash;we may think
of business a little," the young man said.</p>

<p>Ashton looked at him as he took the papers with a<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_49" id="Page_49">[Pg 49]</a></span>
glance as suspicious as his own. They had grown
into a sort of sudden intimacy in a single night.
Edward had been exactly in the state of mind to
which Roland's revelation of chances and possibilities
was as flame to tinder. To have his impatient desires
and longings made practical was everything to him,
and the prudence and business instinct left in him
which made him hesitate to make the plunge by
himself without skilled guidance, endowed the newcomer
with an importance which nothing else could
have given him. He was at home in those regions
which were so entrancing and exciting, yet strange
to Edward. These communications had brought
them to something like confidential friendship, and
yet they did not know each other, and in many
things were mutually antipathetic, repelling, rather
than attracting each other. This interview, though
it was to seal the connection between them, made
their mutual want of sympathy more apparent.
Edward had showed the worst side of himself, and
knew it. He felt even that his self-betrayal had
been so great as to put him almost in his companion's
power, while at the same time Ashton had impertinently
interposed in the family affairs (a point upon
which Edward was as susceptible as any one) by
what he had permitted himself to say about Hester.
Ashton, on the other hand, whose temper in a way
was generous and easy, regarded the fortunate but
ungrateful possessor of Catherine Vernon's sympathies
with an indignant astonishment. To have<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_50" id="Page_50">[Pg 50]</a></span>
been so taken up by such a woman, to have her
affection, her confidence, her unbounded approbation
and trust, and to so repay her! It was incredible,
and the fellow was&mdash;&mdash; Should he fling up all his
pretence at sympathy with this cub, and go off at
once, rather abandoning the possible advantage than
consenting to ally himself with such a being? This
was the point at which they stood for a moment;
but beside the pull of mutual interest how were
they ever to explain the sudden breach, should they
follow their mutual inclinations and make one? It
would be necessary to say something, and what could
be said? and then there lay before Edward a world
of fabulous gain, of sudden wealth, of a hundred
excitements to which Roland seemed to hold the
key; and before Roland the consciousness that not
only the advantage of having Edward, but a whole
population of eager country people ready to put their
money into his hands, and give him such power of
immediate action as he had scarcely dreamt of,
depended upon his self-restraint. Accordingly the
sole evidence of their absolute distrust and dislike
of each other, was this mutual look, exchanged just
before they entered upon the closest relations of
mutual aid.</p>

<p>It was a curious scene for such a beginning. The
solitude of the country road was complete; there
was no one to interrupt them. Although they were
in the freedom of the open air, and subject to be
overtaken by any passer-by, yet the Sunday stillness<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_51" id="Page_51">[Pg 51]</a></span>
was so intense that they might have been in the
most secret retirement on earth. Had they been
seated together in Edward's room at home, a hundred
disturbances were possible. Servants can never be
shut out; if it is only to mend the fire they will
appear in the middle of the most private conference.
And Catherine herself, all unconscious that her
presence was disagreeable, might have come to the
door to summon them, or perhaps even to bring them,
with her own kind hands, the cups of tea which in
his heart Edward loathed as one of the signs of his
slavery. They were the drink of bondage&mdash;those
poor cups that never inebriate. He hated even the
fragrance of them&mdash;the little steams ascending.
Thank Heaven no one could bring him tea out upon
the high road! The chill outer air, the faint scent
of mossy damp and decay, the dim atmosphere without
a sparkle in it, the absolute quiet, would have
better suited confidences of a different description.
But if business is not sentimental it is at least so
urgent and engrossing, that it becomes indifferent
to circumstances. The do-nothing calm of the
Sunday closed curiously around the group; their
rustling papers and eager countenances brought the
strangest interruption of restless life into the almost
dead and blank quiet. The season, the weather, the
hour, the brown quiescent fields in which for the
only moment of the year no mystery of growth was
going on, but only a silent waiting for the seeds and
the spring; this day of leisure when everything was<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_52" id="Page_52">[Pg 52]</a></span>
at rest, all the surrounding circumstances united to
throw into full relief the strange centre to the
landscape&mdash;the two figures which brought a sharp
interest of life into this still-breathing atmosphere,
and waiting stagnation, and Sunday calm.</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_53" id="Page_53">[Pg 53]</a></span></p>




<h2><a name="CHAPTER_IV" id="CHAPTER_IV">CHAPTER XX.</a></h2>

<h3>ROLAND.</h3>


<p>Roland Ashton had been in little doubt as to his
own motives when he came after so many years' indifference
to "look up" his old grandparents, and
take up late, yet not too late, the traditions of filial
duty. These traditions, indeed, had no existence for
this young man. His mother, the victim of a dissipated
and hopeless spendthrift, had died when her
children were young, and her father and mother had
stood aloof from all but the earliest years of the
handful of boys and girls she left behind. The
children scrambled up somehow, and, as is not unusual
among children, whom the squalor of a parent's
vice has disgusted from their earliest consciousness,
succeeded in doing well; the girls making much
better marriages than could have been hoped for;
the boys, flung into the world on their own account
at a very early age, finding the means of maintaining
themselves, and even pushing forward to a position as
good as that which their father had lost. That father<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_54" id="Page_54">[Pg 54]</a></span>
had happily died and gone out of all power to injure
them, a number of years before, and it was only on a
rare visit to the elder sister, who alone knew much
about the family connections, that Roland had
learned something of the state of affairs at Redborough.</p>

<p>Elinor was old enough to remember the time when
the grandfather and grandmother had taken charge of
the little weeping band of babies in their far-off helpless
days, and she had kept up a certain correspondence
with them, when, half ruined by that effort, they were
saved by Catherine Vernon, the mysterious, wealthy
cousin, of whose name everybody in the family had
heard. Elinor remembered so many details when her
memory was jogged, that it occurred to Roland that
it would be a very good thing to go down to Redborough
and pay his grandfather a visit. Catherine
Vernon might turn out to be worth cultivating. She
had stepped in to save old Captain Morgan and his
wife from the consequences of their own liberality to
their daughter's children. She had a little colony of
pensioners about her, Elinor was informed. She was
very rich, so rich that she did not know what to do
with her money. There was a swarm of Vernons
round her, eating her up.</p>

<p>"We are her nearest relations on her mother's
side," Elinor had said. "I do not see why we should
not have our chance too. Don't forget us, Roland, if
you make any way; and you ought to do something;
for you have the right way with women," his sister
said, with some admiration and a little doubt. Her<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_55" id="Page_55">[Pg 55]</a></span>
faith was that he was sure to succeed, her doubt
whether his success would be of use to anybody but
himself; but however it might turn out, it was
always better that one of the Ashtons should
benefit by Catherine Vernon's colossal fortune, than
that it should all go into the hands of the other
people.</p>

<p>Roland himself was well aware that he had the
right way with women. This was not the result of
art and calculation, but was pure nature. The young
man was bent upon his own ends, without much consideration,
in great matters, of other people. But in
small matters he was very considerate, and had a
delightful way of deferring to the comfort of those
about him. And he had the power of looking interested,
and even of feeling interested in everybody
he addressed. And he had fine eyes! What more is
needed to enable a young man to make his way with
women? He was very popular; he might have
married well had he chosen to take that step; indeed,
the chief thing against him was, that he had wavered
too long more than once, before he could make up his
mind to hurt the feelings of a sensitive girl by not
asking her to marry him. It was not, to be sure, his
fault, if they thought that was his meaning. A
prudent girl will never allow herself to think so until
she is asked point-blank; and when you came to investigate
each case, there really was nothing against
Roland. He had made himself agreeable, but then,
that was his way. He could not help making himself
agreeable. The very tone of his voice changed when<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_56" id="Page_56">[Pg 56]</a></span>
he spoke to any woman who pleased him, and he was
very catholic in his tastes. Most women pleased him
if they had good looks, or even the remains of good
looks; or if they were clever; or even if they were
<i>nice</i>; and he was pleasant to all, old and young. The
quality was not without its dangers; but it had great
advantages. He came to Redborough fully determined
to make the conquest of Catherine Vernon,
whom, save that she was rich and benevolent, he
knew very little about. Very rich (according to
Elinor), rather foolishly benevolent, old&mdash;a young man
who has the right way with women could scarcely be
indifferent to such a description. He determined to
find an opportunity in the dull time of the year, when
business was not too exacting, to pay some of the
long over-due respect and gratitude which he owed
to his grandfather. Captain Morgan professed to have
cut himself clear of all his relationships, but it was
true that twenty years before, he had spent everything
he had, and deprived himself of every comfort,
he and his wife, for the maintenance of his daughter's
children. He had never got any return for this from
the children, who knew very little about him. And
it was full time that Roland should come with his
power of making himself agreeable to pay the family
debt&mdash;no harm if he did something for the family
fortunes by the way.</p>

<p>And it has been seen that the young man fully
proved, and at once, the justice of his sister's description
of him. His grandmother, to be sure, was vanquished
by his very name, by a resemblance which<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_57" id="Page_57">[Pg 57]</a></span>
she found out in his mouth and eyelids to his
mother, and by the old love which had never been
extinguished, and could not be extinguished in her
motherly old bosom. But Hester, by a mere chance
encounter in the fire-light, without even seeing
him, without knowing his name, had been moved
to a degree of interest such as she was not conscious
of having ever felt before. And Catherine
Vernon had yielded at once, and without a struggle,
to his influence. This was delightful enough, but
after all it did not come to very much, for Roland
found himself plunged into the midst of a society
upon which he had not at all reckoned. The community
at the Vernonry was simple; he was prepared
for that, and understood it. But when he went to the
Grange and made acquaintance with the closer circle
there, the young men to whom Catherine had made
over the bank and all its interests, and especially
Edward, who was established as if he had been her
son, in her house, a change came over Roland's plans
and anticipations. He had a strong desire for his own
advantage, and inclination to follow that wherever it
might lead him; but he was not malignant in his
selfishness. He had no wish to interfere, unless it
proved to be absolutely necessary, with another man's
career, or to injure his fellow-creatures in promoting
his own interest. And it cannot be denied that he
felt a shock of disappointment which, as he found
when he reasoned with himself on the subject, was
somewhat unreasonable. How could he expect the
field to be clear for him, and the rich, childless woman<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_58" id="Page_58">[Pg 58]</a></span>
of fortune left at his mercy? As if there were not
crowds of other people in the world who had a quick
eye for their own advantage, and clear sight to see
who was likely to serve it! But these discoveries put
him out. They made his mission purposeless. They
reduced it to the mere visit to his grandfather, which
he had called it, but which he by no means intended
it solely to be.</p>

<p>After this first shock of disappointment, however,
Roland began to find himself at once amused and
interested by the new community, into the midst of
which he had dropped. The inmates of the Vernonry
were all simple enough. To be very poor and obliged
to accept favours from a rich relative, yet never to be
able to escape the sense of humiliation, and a grudge
against those who are better off&mdash;that is indeed too
general: and it is even a conventional necessity of
the imagination, that there should be bickerings
and private little spites among neighbours so closely
thrown together. Ashton did not see much of the
Miss Vernon-Ridgways, who had refused to know him
at Catherine's house, nor of their kindred spirit Mr.
Mildmay Vernon; but he could imagine them, and
did so easily. Nor was the gentle little widow, who
was now on one side now on the other, according as
the last speaker moved her, or the young heroine her
daughter, difficult to realise. But Catherine, and the
closer group of her relations, puzzled him more. That
she should gauge them all so exactly, yet go on with
them, pouring kindness upon their ungrateful heads
with a sort of amusement at their ingratitude, almost<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_59" id="Page_59">[Pg 59]</a></span>
a malicious pleasure in it, surprised him less than
that among all who surrounded her there was no one
who gave to her a real and faithful devotion. And
her faith in Edward, whose impatience of her bonds
was the greatest of all, seemed to Roland in his
spectatorship so pitiful, that he could scarcely help
crying out against it to earth and heaven. He was
sorry for her all the more that she was so little sorry
for herself, and it seemed to him that of all her surroundings
he was the only one who was sorry for
Catherine. Even his old people as he called them,
did not fathom that curse of her loneliness. They
thought with everybody else that Edward was a true
son to her, studying her wishes, and thinking of nothing
so much as how to please her. It appalled him
when he thought of the snarl on Edward's lips, the
profound discontent in his soul. It would be cruel
above all things to warn her&mdash;she who felt herself so
clear-sighted&mdash;of the deception she was the victim of;
and yet what could it come to but unhappiness?
Roland felt himself overpowered and almost overawed
by this combination. Nobody but he, it seemed, had
divined it. He had walked back with Edward to the
Grange after their long talk and consultation, and had
taken off his hat with a smile of kindness to the
indistinct figure still seated in the window, which
Edward recognised with a secret grimace. To see her
seated there looking out for their return, was a
pleasure to the more genial spirit. It would have
pleased him to feel that there was some one who
would look out for his coming, who would watch him<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_60" id="Page_60">[Pg 60]</a></span>
like this, with tenderness as he went away. But then
he had no experience of the kind in his own person,
and Edward perhaps had too much of it. While the
one went indoors with a bitter sense that he could go
nowhere without being watched, the other turned
away with a pleasant look back, waving his hand to
Catherine Vernon in the window. She was not likely
to adopt him, but she was kind to him, a pleasant,
handsome old woman, and a most creditable relative.
He was glad he had come if it were for that and no
more. There were other reasons too why Roland
should be glad he had come. He had found a new
client, nay, a group of new clients, by whose means he
could extend his business and his prospects&mdash;solid
people with real money to risk, not men of straw.
Though he was full of aspirations they were all of a
practical kind. He meant to make his fortune; he
meant to do the very best for his customers who
trusted him as well as for himself, and his spirits rose
when he thought what a power of extensive and
successful operation would be given him by the money
of all these new people who were so eager to face the
risks of speculation. They should not suffer by it;
their confidence in him should be repaid, and not only
his, but their fortunes would be made. The certainty
of this went to his head a little, like wine. It had
been well for him to come. It had been the most
important step he had ever taken in his life. It was
not what he had hoped for, and yet it was the thing
above all others that he wanted, a new start for him
in the world, and probably the turning-point of his<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_61" id="Page_61">[Pg 61]</a></span>
life. Other matters were small in comparison with
this, and approbation or disappointment has little to
do with a new customer in any branch of business.
As for other interests he might have taken up on the
way, the importance of them was nothing. Hester
was a pretty girl, and it was natural to him to have
an occupation of that sort in hand; but to suppose
that he was sufficiently interested to allow any thought
of her to beguile him from matters so much more
serious, would have been vain indeed. He felt just
such a momentary touch of pique in hearing that she
was going to be married, as a woman-beauty does
when she hears of any conquests but her own. If she
had seen him (Roland) first, she would not have been,
he felt, so easily won; but he laughed at himself for
the thought, as perhaps the woman-beauty would
scarcely have been moved to do.</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_62" id="Page_62">[Pg 62]</a></span></p>




<h2><a name="CHAPTER_V" id="CHAPTER_V">CHAPTER XX1.</a></h2>

<h3>WARNING.</h3>


<p>"I think, if you will let me, I will send down
Emma for a little fresh air and to make your
acquaintance, grandmother. She is rather of the
butterfly order of girls, but there is no harm in her.
And as it is likely that I shall have a good deal to
do with the Vernons&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"What do you want with the Vernons? Why
should you have a good deal to do with them?"
asked Captain Morgan, hastily, and it must be added
rather testily, for the old man's usually placid humour
had been disturbed of late.</p>

<p>"In the most legitimate way," said Ashton. "You
can't wish me, now that I am just launched in business,
to shut my eyes to my own advantage. It will
be for their advantage too. They are going to be
customers of mine. When you have a man's money
to invest you have a good deal to do with him. I
shall have to come and go in all likelihood often."</p>

<p>"Your customers&mdash;and their money to invest&mdash;what<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_63" id="Page_63">[Pg 63]</a></span>
do mean by that? I hope you haven't taken
advantage of my relationship with Catherine Vernon
to draw in those boys of hers&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Grandfather," said Roland, with an <i>air digne</i>
which it was impossible not to respect, "if you think
a little you will see how injurious your words are.
I cannot for a moment suppose you mean them.
Catherine Vernon's boys, as you call them, are nearly
as old, and I suppose as capable of judging what is
for their advantage, as I am. If they choose to
entrust me with their business, is there any reason
why I should refuse it? I am glad to get everything
I can."</p>

<p>"Yes, sir, there is a reason," said Captain Morgan.
"I know what speculation is. I know what happens
when a hot-headed young fellow gets a little bit of
success, and the gambling fever gets into his veins.
Edward Vernon is just the sort of fellow to fall
a victim. He is a morose, ill-tempered, bilious
being&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Stop," said Roland; "have a little consideration,
sir. There is no question of any victim."</p>

<p>"You are just a monomaniac, Rowley, my old
man," said Mrs. Morgan.</p>

<p>"I know everything you can say," said the old
captain. "All that jargon about watching the
market, and keeping a cool head, and running no
unnecessary risks&mdash;I know it all. You think you
can turn over your money, as you call it, always to
your advantage, and keep risk at arm's length."</p>

<p>"I do not say so much as that; but risk may be<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_64" id="Page_64">[Pg 64]</a></span>
reduced to a minimum, and profit be the rule, when one
gives one's mind to it&mdash;which it is my business to do."</p>

<p>"Oh, I know everything you can say," said the
old man. "Give your mind to it! Give your mind
to an honest trade, that's my advice to you. What
is it at the best but making money out of the follies
of your fellow-creatures? They take a panic and
you buy from them, to their certain loss, and then
they take a freak of enthusiasm and you sell to them,
to their certain loss. Somebody must always lose in
order that you should gain. It is a devilish trade&mdash;I
said so when I heard you had gone into it; but for
God's sake, Roland Ashton, keep that for the outside
world, and don't bring ruin and misery here."</p>

<p>"What can I say?" said the young man. He rose
up from the table where he had been taking his
last meal with the old people. He kept his temper
beautifully, Mrs. Morgan thought, with great pride
in him. He grew pale and a little excited, as was
natural, but never forgot his respect for his grandfather,
who, besides that venerable relationship, was
an old man. "What can I say? To tell you that I
consider my profession an honourable one would be
superfluous, for you can't imagine I should have
taken it up had I thought otherwise."</p>

<p>"Rowley, my old man," said Mrs. Morgan, "you
are just as hot-headed as when you were a boy.
But, Roland, you must remember that we have
suffered from it; and everybody says when you begin
to gamble in business, it is worse than any other
kind of gambling."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_65" id="Page_65">[Pg 65]</a></span></p>

<p>"When you begin; but there is no need ever to
begin, that I can see."</p>

<p>"And then, my dear&mdash;I am not taking up your
grandfather's view, but just telling you what he
means&mdash;then, my dear, Catherine Vernon has been
very kind to him and me. She is fond of us, I really
believe. She trusts us, which to her great hurt,
poor thing, she does to few&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Catherine Vernon is a noble character. She
has a fine nature. She has a scorn of meanness and
everything that is little&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>The old lady shook her head, "That is true," she
said; "but it is her misfortune, poor thing, that she
gets her amusement out of all that, and she believes
in few. You must not, Roland," she said, laying her
hand upon his arm, "you must not, my dear lad&mdash;Oh,
listen to what my old man says! You must not
be the means of leading into imprudence or danger
any one she is fond of&mdash;she that has been so kind to
him and to me!"</p>

<p>The old hand was heavy on his arm, bending him
down towards her with an imperative clasp, and this
sudden appeal was so unexpected from the placid
old woman, who seemed to have outgrown all impassioned
feeling and lived only to soothe and reconcile
opposing influences, that both the young man and
the old were impressed by it. Roland Ashton stooped,
and kissed his grandmother's forehead. He had a
great power in him of response to every call of
emotion.</p>

<p>"Dear old mother," he said, "if I were a villain<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_66" id="Page_66">[Pg 66]</a></span>
and meant harm, I don't see how I could carry on
with it after that. But I want you to believe that
I am not a villain," he said, with a half-laugh of
feeling.</p>

<p>Old Captain Morgan was so touched by the scene
that in the weakness of old age and the unexpectedness
of this interposition the tears stood in his eyes.</p>

<p>"When you do put your shoulder to the wheel,
Mary," he said, with a half-laugh too, and holding
out a hand to Roland, with whom for the first time
he found himself in perfect sympathy, "you do it
like a hero. I'll add nothing to what she has said,
my boy. Even at the risk of losing a profit, or
failing in a stroke of business, respect the house that
has sheltered your family. That's what we both say."</p>

<p>"And I have answered, sir," said Roland, "that
even if I were bent on mischief I could not persist
after such an appeal&mdash;and I am not bent on mischief,"
he added, this time with a smile; and so fell
into easy conversation about his sister, and the good
it would do her to pay the old people a visit. "I am
out all day, and she is left to herself. It is dull for
her in a little house at Kilburn, all alone&mdash;though
she says she likes it," he went on, glad, as indeed
they all were, to get down to a milder level of
conversation.</p>

<p>The old captain had not taken kindly to the idea
of having Emma; but after the moment of sympathetic
emotion which they had all passed through,
there was no rejecting so very reasonable a petition.
And on the whole, looking back upon it, now that the<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_67" id="Page_67">[Pg 67]</a></span>
young man's portmanteau stood packed in the hall,
and he himself was on the eve of departure, even
the captain could not deny that there had been on
the whole more pleasure in Roland's visit than he
had at all expected. However he might modify the
account of his own sensations, it had certainly been
agreeable to meet a young fellow of his own blood,
his descendant, a man among the many women with
whom he was surrounded, and one who, even when
they disagreed, could support his opinions, and was
at least intelligent, whatever else. He had received
him with unfeigned reluctance, almost forgetting who
his mother was in bitter and strong realisation that
he was his father's son and bore his father's name.
But personal encounter had so softened everything,
that though Roland actually resembled his objectionable
father, the captain parted from him with regret.
And, after all, why should not Emma come? She
was a girl, which in itself softened everything (notwithstanding
that the captain had recognised as a
distinct element in Roland's favour that he was a
man, and so a most desirable interruption to the
flood of womankind&mdash;but nobody is bound to be consistent
in these matters). It was good of her brother,
as soon as he was afloat in the world, to take upon
himself the responsibility of providing for Emma,
and on the whole the captain, always ready to be
kind, saw no reason for refusing to be kind to this
lonely girl because she was of his own flesh and
blood. He drew much closer to his grandson during
these last few hours than he had done yet. He went<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_68" id="Page_68">[Pg 68]</a></span>
out with him to make his adieux to Mrs. John and
her daughter. And Hester came forward to give
them her hand with that little enlargement about
the eyes, which was a sure sign of some emotion in
her mind. She had seen a great deal of Roland, and
his going away gave her a pang which she scarcely
explained to herself. It was so much life subtracted
from the scanty circle. She too, like Edward, felt
that she wanted air, and the departure of one who
had brought so much that was new into her restricted
existence was a loss&mdash;that was all. She had assured
herself so half-a-dozen times this morning&mdash;therefore
no doubt it was true. As for Roland, it was not in
him to part from such a girl without an attempt at
least to intensify this effect. He drew her towards
the window, apart from the others, to watch, as he
said, for the coming of the slow old fly from
Redborough which was to convey him away.</p>

<p>"My sister is coming," he said, "and I hope you
will be friends. I will instruct her to bring in my
name on every possible occasion, that you may not
altogether forget me."</p>

<p>"There is no likelihood that we shall forget you;
we see so few people here."</p>

<p>"And you call that a consolatory reason! I shall
see thousands of people, but I shall not forget <i>you</i>."
It was Roland's way to use no name. He said <i>you</i>
as if there was nobody but yourself who owned that
pronoun, with an inference that in thinking of the
woman before him, whoever she might be, he, in his
heart, identified her from all women.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_69" id="Page_69">[Pg 69]</a></span></p>

<p>Hester was embarrassed by his eyes and his tone,
but not displeased. He had pleased her from the
first. There is a soft and genial interest excited in
the breasts of women by such a man, at which
everybody smiles and which few acknowledge, yet
which is not the less dangerous for that. It rouses
a prepossession in his favour, whatever may come of
it afterwards; and he had done his best to fill up all
his spare moments, when he was not doing something
else, in Hester's company. It would be vain
to say that this homage had not been sweet, and it
had been entertaining, which is so great a matter. It
had opened out a new world to her, and expanded
all her horizon. With his going all these new
outlets into life would be closed again. She felt a
certain terror of the place without Roland. He had
imported into the air an excitement, an expectation.
The prospect of seeing him was a prospect full of
novelty and interest, and even when he did not
come, there had always been that expectation to
brighten the dimness. Now there could be no expectation,
not even a disappointment; and Hester's
eyes were large, and had a clearness of emotion in
them. She might have cried&mdash;indeed, it seemed
very likely that she had cried at the thought of his
going away, and would cry again.</p>

<p>"Though I don't know," he added, leaning against
the recess of the window, and so shutting her in
where she stood looking out, "why I should leave so
many thoughts here, for I don't suppose they will do
me any good. They tell me that your mind will be<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_70" id="Page_70">[Pg 70]</a></span>
too fully, and, alas, too pleasantly occupied. Yes, I
say alas! and alas again! I am not glad you will
be so pleasantly occupied. I had rather you were
dull a little, that you might have time now and then
to remember me."</p>

<p>"You are talking a great deal of nonsense, Mr.
Ashton&mdash;but that is your way. And how am I to
be so pleasantly occupied? I am glad to hear it,
but I certainly did not know. What is going to
happen?"</p>

<p>"Is this hypocrisy, or is it kindness to spare me?
Or is it&mdash;&mdash;? They tell me that I ought to&mdash;congratulate
you," said Roland with a sigh.</p>

<p>"Congratulate me? On what? I suppose," said
Hester, growing red, "there is only one thing upon
which girls are congratulated: and that does not
exist in my case."</p>

<p>"May I believe you?" he said, putting his hands
together with a supplicating gesture, "may I put
faith in you? But it seemed on such good authority.
Your cousin Edward&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Did Edward tell you so?" Hester grew so red
that the flush scorched her. She was angry and
mortified and excited. Her interest changed, in a
moment, from the faint interest which she had felt
in the handsome young deceiver before her, to a
feeling more strong and deeply rooted, half made
out of repulsion, half bitter, half injured, yet more
powerful in attraction than any other sentiment of
her mind. Roland was ill-pleased that he was
superseded by this other feeling. It was a sensation<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_71" id="Page_71">[Pg 71]</a></span>
quite unusual to him, and he did not like it. "He
had no right to say so," said Hester; "he knew
it was not true."</p>

<p>"All is fair in love and war," said Roland;
"perhaps he wished it to be&mdash;not true."</p>

<p>"I do not know what he wishes, and I do not
care!" Hester cried, after a pause, with a passion
which did not carry out her words. "He has never
been a friend to me," she said hastily. "He might
have helped me, he might have been kind&mdash;not that
I want his help or any one's," cried the girl, her
passion growing as she went on. Then she came to
a dead stop, and gave Roland a rapid look, to see
how much he had divined of her real feelings.
"But he need not have said what was not true,"
she added in a subdued tone.</p>

<p>"I forgive him," said Roland, "because it is not
true. If it had been true it would not have been
so easy to forgive. I am coming back again, and I
should have seen you&mdash;changed. It was too much.
Now I can look forward with unmingled pleasure.
It is one's first duty, don't you think, to minister to
the pleasure of one's grandparents? they are old;
one ought to come often, as often as duty will
permit."</p>

<p>Hester looked up to him with a little surprise, the
transition was so sudden; and, to tell the truth, the
tumult in her own mind was not so entirely subdued
that she could bestow her full attention upon
Roland's <i>double entendre</i>.</p>

<p>He laughed. "One would think, by your look,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_72" id="Page_72">[Pg 72]</a></span>
that you did not share my fine sense of duty," he
said; "but you must not frown upon it. I am
coming soon, very soon, again. A fortnight ago the
place was only a name to me; but now it is a name
that I shall remember for ever," he added with
fervour.</p>

<p>Hester looked at him this time with a smile upon
her mouth. She had recovered herself and come
back to the diversion of his presence, the amusement
and novelty he had brought. A half sense of
the exaggeration and sentimental nonsense of his
speech was in her smile; and he was more or less
conscious of it too. When their eyes met they
both laughed; and yet she was not displeased,
nor he untouched by some reality of feeling. The
exaggeration was humorous, and the sentiment not
altogether untrue.</p>

<p>"Do you say that always when you leave a
place?" Hester said.</p>

<p>"Very often," he acknowledged; and they both
laughed again, which, to her at least, was very
welcome, as she had been doubly on the verge of
tears&mdash;for anger and for regret. "But seldom as I
do now," he added, "you may believe me. The old
people are better and kinder than I had dreamt of;
it does one good to be near them; and then I have
helped myself on in the world by this visit, but that
you will not care for. And then&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>Here Roland broke off abruptly, and gazed, as his
fashion was, as feeling the impotence of words to
convey all that the heart would say.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_73" id="Page_73">[Pg 73]</a></span></p>

<p>It was very shortly after this that the white horse
which drew the old fly from Redborough&mdash;the horse
which was supposed to have been chosen for this
quality, that it could be seen a long way off to
console the souls of those who felt it could never
arrive in time&mdash;was seen upon the road, and the last
moment had visibly come. Not the less for the
commotion and tumult or other feelings through
which her heart had gone, did Hester acknowledge
the emotions which belonged to this leave-taking.
The depth and sadness of Roland's eyes&mdash;those
expressive eyes which said so many things, the
pathos of his mouth, the lingering clasp in which
he held her hand, all affected her. There was a
magic about him which the girl did not resist,
though she was conscious of the other side of it,
the faint mixture of the fictitious which did not
impair its charm. She stood and watched him
from the low window of the parlour which looked
that way, while the fly was being laden, with a
blank countenance. She felt the corners of her
mouth droop, her eyes widen, her face grow longer.
It was as if all the novelty, the variety, the pleasure
of life were going away. It was a dull afternoon,
which was at once congenial as suiting the circumstances
and oppressive as enhancing the gloom.
She watched the portmanteau put in as if she had
been watching a funeral. When Roland stepped in
after his grandfather, who in the softness of the
moment had offered, to the great surprise of everybody,
to accompany him to the station, Hester still<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_74" id="Page_74">[Pg 74]</a></span>
looked on with melancholy gravity. She was almost
on a level with them where she stood looking out;
her mother all smiles, kissing her hand beside her.
"I wish you would show a little interest, Hester,"
Mrs. John said. "You might at least wave your
hand. If it were only for the old captain's sake
whom you always profess to be so fond of." Roland
at this moment leant out of the window of the fly
and took off his hat to her for the last time. Mrs.
John thought it was barbarous to take no notice.
She redoubled her own friendly salutations; but
Hester stood like a statue, forcing a faint ghost of a
smile, but not moving a finger. She stood thus
watching them long after they had driven away, till
they had almost disappeared in the smoke of Redborough.
She saw the fly stop at the Grange and
Miss Catherine come out to the door to take leave of
him: and then the slow vehicle disappeared altogether.
The sky seemed to lean down almost
touching the ground; the stagnant afternoon air
had not a breath to move it. Hester said to herself
that nothing more would happen now. She knew
the afternoon atmosphere, the approach of tea, the
scent of it in the air, the less ethereal bread-and-butter,
and then the long dull evening. It seemed
endless to look forward, as if it never would be
night. And Mrs. John, as soon as the fly was out of
sight, had drawn her chair towards the fire and
begun to talk. "I am sure I am very sorry he has
gone," Mrs. John said. "I did not think I should
have liked him at first, but I declare I like him very<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_75" id="Page_75">[Pg 75]</a></span>
much now. How long is it since he came, Hester?
Only a fortnight! I should have said three weeks
at least. I think it was quite unnatural of the
captain to talk of him as he did, for I am sure he
is a very nice young man. Where are you going?
not I hope for one of your long walks: for the night
closes in very early now, and it will soon be time
for tea."</p>

<p>"Don't you think, mamma," said Hester, somewhat
hypocritically, "that it would be kind to go
in and keep Mrs. Morgan company a little, as she
will be quite alone?"</p>

<p>"That is always your way as soon as I show any
inclination for a little talk," said her mother provoked,
not without reason. Then she softened, being
at heart the most good-natured of women. "Perhaps
you are right," she said, "the old lady will be lonely.
Give her my love, and say I should have come to see
her myself, but that&mdash;" Mrs. John paused for a
reason, "but that I am afraid for my neuralgia," she
added triumphantly. "You know how bad it was
the other day."</p>

<p>Thus sanctioned Hester threw her grey "cloud"
round her, and ran round to console Mrs. Morgan,
while her mother arranged herself comfortably with
a footstool, a book upon the table beside her, and
her knitting, but with a furtive inclination towards
an afternoon nap, which the greyness of the day,
the early failing light in the dark wainscoted parlour,
and the absence of all movement about her, naturally
inclined her to. Mrs. John was at the age<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_76" id="Page_76">[Pg 76]</a></span>
when we are very much ashamed of the afternoon
nap, and she was well provided with semblances of
occupation in case any one should come. But Mrs.
Morgan was far beyond any such simple deceit.
Eighty has vast advantages in this way. When she
felt disposed to doze a little she was quite pleased,
almost proud of the achievement. She had indeed
a book on the table with her spectacles carefully
folded into it, but she did not require any occupation.</p>

<p>"I had a kind of feeling that you would come,
my pet," she said as Hester appeared. "When I
want you very much I think some kind little angel
must go and tap you on the shoulder, for you always
come."</p>

<p>"The captain would say it is a brain-wave," said
Hester.</p>

<p>"The captain says a great deal of nonsense, my
dear," said the old lady with a smile, "but think of
him going with Roland to the station! He has been
vanquished, quite vanquished&mdash;which is a great
pleasure to me. And Emma is coming. I hope she
will not wear out the good impression&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Is she not so&mdash;nice?" Hester asked.</p>

<p>The old lady looked her favourite intently in the
face. She saw the too great clearness of Hester's
eyes, and that her mouth was not smiling, but drawn
downward; and a vague dread filled her mind. She
was full of love and charity, but she was full of
insight too; and though she loved Roland, she did
not think it would be to the advantage of Hester
to love him.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_77" id="Page_77">[Pg 77]</a></span></p>

<p>"Roland is very nice," she said. "Poor boy, perhaps
that is his temptation. It is his nature to
please whomsoever he comes across. It is a beautiful
kind of nature; but I am not sure that it is not
very dangerous both for himself&mdash;and others."</p>

<p>It was fortunate that Hester did not divine what
her friend meant.</p>

<p>"Dangerous&mdash;to please?" she said, with a little
curiosity. She liked Roland so much, that even
from the lips of those who had more right to him
than she had, she did not like to hear blame.</p>

<p>"To wish to please&mdash;everybody," said the old
lady. "My poor lad! that is his temptation. Your
grandfather, if he were here&mdash;my dear, I beg your
pardon. I have got into the way of saying it: as
if my old man was your grandfather too."</p>

<p>"I like it," Hester said, with the only gleam of
her usual frank and radiant smile which Mrs.
Morgan had yet seen. But this made the old lady
only more afraid.</p>

<p>"There is nobody he could be more fatherly to,"
she said. "What I meant was that if he were here,
he would have something ready out of a book, as you
and he are always going on with your poetries; but
I never was a poetry woman, as you know. Life is
all my learning. And I have seen people that have
had plenty of heart, Hester, if they had given it
fair play&mdash;but frittered it away on one and another,
trying to give a piece to each, making each believe
that she (for it is mostly upon women that the spell
works) was the one above all others. But you are<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_78" id="Page_78">[Pg 78]</a></span>
so young, my darling; you will not know what I
mean."</p>

<p>A faint, uneasy colour, came on Hester's face.</p>

<p>"I think I know what you mean," she said. "I
understand how you should think so of Mr. Ashton.
You don't see so well as you did, dear Mrs. Morgan,
when you have not got your spectacles on. If you
did, you would see that when he talks like <i>that</i>, he
is ready to laugh all the time."</p>

<p>"Is that so, my love? Then I am very glad to
hear you say so," cried the old lady. But she knew
very well that her supposed want of sight was a
delusion, and that Hester knew it was only for
reading that she ever used her spectacles. She
felt, however, all the more that her warning had
been taken, and that it was unnecessary to proceed
further. "You are young and sweet," she said, "my
dear: but the best thing still is that you have
sense. Oh, what it is to have sense! it is the best
blessing in life."</p>

<p>Hester made no reply to this praise. Her heart
was beating more quickly than usual. What she
had said was quite true: but all the time, though
he had been ready to laugh, and though she had
been ready to laugh, she was aware that there was
something more. The tone of banter had not been
all. The sense of something humorous, under those
high-flown phrases, had not exhausted them. She
was intended to laugh, indeed, if they did not secure
another sentiment; but the first aim, and perhaps
the last aim, of the insidious Roland, had been to<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_79" id="Page_79">[Pg 79]</a></span>
secure this other sentiment. Hester did not enter
into these distinctions, but she felt them; and when
she thus put forward Mrs. Morgan's failing sight, it
was with a natural casuistry which she knew would
be partially seen through, and yet would have its
effect. This made her feel that there was no reply
to be made to the praise of her "sense," which the
old lady had given. Was it her cunning that the
old lady meant to praise? There was a little
silence, and the subject of Roland was put aside,
not perhaps quite to the satisfaction of either; but
there was nothing more that could be said.</p>

<p>And presently the old captain came back, groaning
a little over his long walk.</p>

<p>"Why do you never remind me," he said, "what
an old fool I am? To drive in that jingling affair,
and to walk back&mdash;two miles if it is a yard&mdash;well,
then, a mile and a half. My dear, what was half a
mile when you and I were young is two miles now,
and not an inch less; but I have seen him off the
premises. And now, Hester, we shall have our
talks again, and our walks again, without any
interruption&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Do not speak so fast, Rowley. There is Emma
coming; and Hester will like a girl to talk with,
and to walk with, better than an old fellow like
you."</p>

<p>"That old woman insults me," said the captain.
"She thinks I am as old as she is&mdash;but Hester, you
and I know better. You are looking anxious, my
child. Do you think we are a frivolous old pair<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_80" id="Page_80">[Pg 80]</a></span>
talking as we ought not&mdash;two old fools upon the
brink of the grave?"</p>

<p>"Captain Morgan! I, to have such a thought!
And what should I do without you?" cried Hester,
in quick alarm. This brought the big tears to
her eyes, and perhaps she was glad, for various
causes, to have a perfectly honest and comprehensible
cause in the midst of her agitation, for those
tears.</p>

<p>"This was brought to my mind very clearly to-day,"
said the old captain. "When I saw that young
fellow go off, a man in full career of his life, and
thought of his parents swept away, the mother whom
you know I loved, Mary, as dearly as a man ever
loves his child, and the father whom I hated, both
so much younger than we are, and both gone for
years; and here are we still living, as if we had
been forgotten somehow. We just go on in our
usual, from day to day, and it seems quite natural;
but when you think of all of them&mdash;gone&mdash;and we
two still here&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"We are not forgotten," said the old lady, in her
easy chair, smiling upon him, folding those old
hands which were now laid up from labour, hands
that had worked hard in their day. "We have
some purpose to serve yet, or we would not be
here."</p>

<p>"I suppose so&mdash;I suppose so," said the old man,
with a sigh; and then he struck his stick upon the
floor, and cried out, "but not, God forbid it, as the
instruments of evil to the house that has sheltered<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_81" id="Page_81">[Pg 81]</a></span>
us, Mary! My heart misgives me. I would like
at least, before anything comes of it, that we should
be out of the way, you and I."</p>

<p>"You were always a man of little faith," his wife
said. "Why should you go out of your way to
meet the evil, that by God's good grace will never
come? It will never come; we have not been
preserved for that. You would as soon teach me
Job's lesson as to believe that, my old man."</p>

<p>"What was Job's lesson? It was, 'Though
He slay me, yet will I trust in Him,'" Captain
Morgan said.</p>

<p>"Oh, my Rowley!" cried the old lady, "I was
wrong to say you were of little faith! It is you that
are the faithful one, and not me. I am just nothing
beside you, as I have always been."</p>

<p>The old captain took his wife's old hands in his,
and gave her a kiss upon her faded cheek, and they
smiled upon each other, the two who had been one
for nearly sixty years. Meanwhile, Hester sitting by,
looked on with large eyes of wonder and almost
affright. She did not know what it meant. She
could not divine what it could be that made them
differ, yet made them agree. What harm could they
do to the house that sheltered them, two old, good,
peaceful people, who were kind to everybody? She
gazed at them with her wondering young eyes, and
did what she could to fathom the mystery: then
retired from it, thinking it perhaps some little fad of
the old people, which she had no knowledge of, nor<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_82" id="Page_82">[Pg 82]</a></span>
means of understanding. The best people, Hester
thought, when they grew old take strange notions
into their heads, and trouble themselves about
nothing; and of course they missed Roland. She
broke in upon them in that moment of feeling, as
soon as she dared speak for wonder, making an effort
to amuse them, and bring them back to their usual
ways; and that effort was not in vain.</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_83" id="Page_83">[Pg 83]</a></span></p>




<h2><a name="CHAPTER_VI" id="CHAPTER_VI">CHAPTER XXII.</a></h2>

<h3>DANCING TEAS.</h3>


<p>It was shortly after the departure of Roland that
a new era dawned for Hester in social life. Mrs.
Algernon Merridew had felt from the moment of her
return from Abroad that there was a work for her to
do in Redborough. It was not the same as in her
maiden days, when she had been at the head of
Harry's household, wonderfully enfranchised indeed,
but still somewhat under the awe of Aunt Catherine.
But now she was altogether independent, and nobody
had any right to make suggestions as to who she
should invite or how she should entertain, to a
married lady, with an admiring husband, not to speak
of brother&mdash;and sisters-in-law, eagerly anticipating
social elevation by her means, at her back. Ellen
was not ill-natured. She was very willing to promote
the happiness and prosperity of others, so long as she
could do so without any diminution of her own&mdash;a
negative goodness which the world at large is very
well pleased to acknowledge as satisfactory. And it<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_84" id="Page_84">[Pg 84]</a></span>
is not at all probable that the representations of
Harry, or the good-humoured suggestions of Algernon
inspired by Harry, to the effect that it would be
sublimely good of her to take up and brighten the
life of Hester, would have come to very much, had it
not at the same time occurred to Ellen that Hester
was the best assistant she could have on her own side
of the house, in the indispensable work of making
her Thursdays "go." Rather than that they should
not "go," she would have embraced her worst enemy,
had she possessed one; and she did not care to rely
upon the Merridew girls, feeling as she did that she
had condescended in entering their family, and that
they must never be allowed to forget that they owed
everything to her, and she nothing to them. But at
the same time she required a feminine auxiliary, a
somebody to be her right hand, and help to make
everything "go." The result of her cogitations on
this subject was that she set out for the Vernonry
one afternoon in the little victoria, which Algernon,
rather tremulous about the cost, had set up for her,
and which, with the smart coachman who for the
moment condescended to be gardener too, and the
boy on the box who was of quite a fashionable size,
looked a very imposing little equipage. Ellen lay
back in her little carriage enveloped in her new sealskin,
with a little hat of the same upon her head, and
a muff also of the same, and her light hair looking
all the brighter against that dark background, with
bracelets enough to make a jingle wherever she went,
and which she had to push up upon her arm from<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_85" id="Page_85">[Pg 85]</a></span>
time to time, and a violet scent about herself and all
her garments, at least the scent which is called violet
at Piesse and Lubin's, which served her purpose.
When she drove up in this state, it may be supposed
what a flutter she made in the afternoon atmosphere.
The inmates of the Vernonry rushed to their windows.</p>

<p>"It is that little doll Ellen, come to show off more
of her finery," said one sister.</p>

<p>"I wonder why she comes here, when you set her
down so, Matilda," said the other.</p>

<p>They kept behind the curtains, one over the other's
shoulder, that she might not see how curious they
were. But when Ellen floated in at the verandah
door, and was evidently gone to see Mrs. John, their
astonishment was boundless. They shrugged their
shoulders and interchanged glances with Mr. Mildmay
Vernon, who, with his newspaper in his hand,
had appeared at his window.</p>

<p>"Did he think she was going to see <i>him</i>?" Miss
Matilda said, even while addressing these satires in pantomime
to him. "What interest can he take in Ellen?
It is just prying and curiosity, and nothing more."</p>

<p>The gentleman's comments were not more friendly.
He chuckled as he saw where Ellen was going.</p>

<p>"The old cats will think it a visit to them, and
they will be disappointed," he said to himself, all the
same shrugging his shoulders back again to Miss
Matilda. They kept on the watch all the time the
visit lasted, and it was a long one. The sisters
discussed the victoria, the horse, the little footman,
the great fur rug which Ellen threw off as she<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_86" id="Page_86">[Pg 86]</a></span>
jumped lightly out of the carriage. It was somewhat
hard indeed that a little minx like Ellen should have
all these things, and her seniors, her betters, who
would have enjoyed them so much, none of them.
But so it always is in this unjust world.</p>

<p>On the other side of the partition from where the
sisters were sitting, Ellen's appearance had caused an
almost equal sensation. She was not looked for, and
the proposal she made was a very startling one.</p>

<p>"I am going to begin my <i>Th&eacute;s Dansantes</i>, and I
want you to help me," she said abruptly. "I want
you to be my right hand; just like my sister. You
know I can't do everything myself. Mrs. John, you
shall come too, I never intended to leave you out;
but I want Hester to help me, for she is the only
one that can help me. She is really my cousin.
Clara and Connie are only my sisters-in-law, and I
don't care to have them about me in that position.
It would be nice for me, and it would be giving
Hester the best of chances. Now, Mrs. John, I am
sure you will see it in that light. What could be
better for a girl? All that she will meet will be the
best sort of people: and she would have her chance."</p>

<p>"I don't know what you mean by having my
chance&mdash;and I don't want any chance," said Hester,
in a flush of shame and indignation; but Ellen put
her down with a wave of her gloved hand and arm,
all tinkling with bangles.</p>

<p>"Of course you don't know anything about it,"
she said, "an unmarried girl! We don't want you to
know. Your mother and I will talk about that; but<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_87" id="Page_87">[Pg 87]</a></span>
you can understand that a nice dance in a nice house
like ours will be something pleasant. And you
would be there not just like a visitor, but like one of
the family, and get a good deal of attention, and as
many partners as ever you liked."</p>

<p>"Of course, Ellen, of course," cried Mrs. John. "I
am sure <i>I</i> understand you. It would be very nice
for Hester. At her age every girl likes a little
gaiety, and in my position I have never been able to
give it to her. It was very different when my husband
was alive, when we were in the White House.
I am sure I have never grudged it to you, but it
made a great difference. I was not brought up to
this sort of thing. I had my balls, and my parties,
as many as could be wished, when I was Hester's age.
If her poor papa had lived, and we had stayed in the
White House, she would have held a very different
position. It gives me a little prick, you will understand,
to think of Hester wanting anybody to be kind
to her; but still, as it is so, and as you are her
relation, I never could object. You will find no
objection from me."</p>

<p>"No, I should think not," cried Ellen, throwing
back her warm coat. It was at the time when sealskins
were rare, when they were just "coming in,"
and Mrs. John looked at it with admiration. She
did not ask, as the Miss Vernon-Ridgways did, why
this little minx should have everything; but she
remembered with a little regret the days when she
too had everything that a young woman could desire,
and wondered, with a little flutter at her heart,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_88" id="Page_88">[Pg 88]</a></span>
whether when Hester married she would have a
sealskin and a victoria, and all the other crowns of
happiness. She looked with something of a pathetic
look at her daughter. Ah! if she could but see
Hester as Ellen was!</p>

<p>Meanwhile Hester was elevating her young head as
was natural, in special scorn of the "chance" which
her cousin meant to secure for her, and in defiance
altogether of the scheme, which nevertheless (for she
was but human and nineteen, and the prospect of a
dance every week took away her breath) moved her
in spite of herself.</p>

<p>"When I was a child," Hester said, "when you
first came to see us, Cousin Ellen, you said you must
see a great deal of me, that I must go to your
house, that you and Harry would take me out,
that I should have a share in your pleasures.
Perhaps my mother and you don't remember&mdash;but
I do. How I used to look out for you every morning;
how I used to watch at the window, thinking
they will surely come or send, or take some notice
to-day. I was very young, you know, and believed
everything, and wished so much to drive about and
to go to parties. But you never came."</p>

<p>"To think she should remember all that!" cried
Ellen, a little abashed. "Of course I didn't. Why,
you were only a child. One said so to please you;
but how can you suppose one meant anything?
What could I have done with you then&mdash;a little
thing among lots of people? Why, you wouldn't
have been allowed to come! It would have been<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_89" id="Page_89">[Pg 89]</a></span>
bad for you. You would have heard things you
oughtn't to hear. You wouldn't have let her come,
would you, Mrs. John?"</p>

<p>"Certainly not, my dear," said Mrs. John, promptly.
To tell the truth, it was she who had complained
the most though it was Hester who had been most
indignant. She forgot this, however, in the new
interest of the moment. "It would never have
done," she said, with all sincerity. "Your cousin,
of course, only spoke to please you, Hester. I never
could have permitted you, a little thing at your
lessons, to plunge into pleasure at that age."</p>

<p>"Then why&mdash;" cried Hester, open-mouthed; but
when she had got so far she paused. What was the
use of saying any more? She looked at them both
with her large brown eyes, full of light and wonder,
and a little indignation and a little scorn, then
stopped and laughed, and changed the subject.
"When I go to Cousin Catherine's," she said,
"which I never do when I can help it, we stand in
a corner all the evening, my mother and I. We
are thankful when any one speaks to us&mdash;the
curate's daughters and the Miss Reynoldses and
we&mdash;&mdash; There is never anybody to take us in to
supper. All the Redborough people sweep past
while mamma stands waiting; and then perhaps
some gentleman who has been down once before
takes pity, and says, 'Haven't you been down to
supper, Mrs. Vernon? Dear me! then let me take
you.' You will please to remember that my mother
is Mrs. Vernon, Ellen, and not Mrs. John."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_90" id="Page_90">[Pg 90]</a></span></p>

<p>"I only say it for&mdash;short," said Ellen, apologetically;
"and how can I help what happens at Aunt
Catherine's? I don't go in for her ways. I don't
mean to do as she does. Why do you talk of Aunt
Catherine to me?"</p>

<p>"It is only to let you see that I will not be treated
so," the girl said with indignation. "If you think I
will go to your house like that, just because you are
a relation, I won't, Ellen; and you had better understand
this before we begin."</p>

<p>"What a spitfire it is!" said Ellen, raising her
hand with a toss of all her bracelets to brush
Hester's downy cheek with a playful touch. "To
think she should put all these things down in her
book against us! I should never remember if it
were me. I should be furious for the moment, and
then I should forget all about it. Now, Hester,
you look here. I am not asking you for your own
pleasure, you silly; I am asking you to help <i>me</i>.
Don't you see that makes all the difference? You
are no good to Aunt Catherine. She doesn't need
you. She asks you only for civility. But it stands
to reason, you know, that I can't look after all the
people myself if I am to have any of the fun. I
must have some one to help me. Of course you will
have every attention paid you; for, don't you see, you
are wanted. I can't get on without you. Oh, <i>of
course</i>, that makes all the difference! I am sure
your mamma understands very well, even if you are
too young and too silly to understand!"</p>

<p>"Yes, Hester, your cousin is quite right," said Mrs.<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_91" id="Page_91">[Pg 91]</a></span>
John, eagerly. The poor lady was so anxious to
secure her child's assent to what she felt would be
so manifestly for her advantage that she was ready
to back up everything that Ellen said. A spark of
animation and new life had lighted up in Mrs. John's
eyes. It was not a very elevated kind of hope perhaps,
yet no hope that is centred in the successes of
another is altogether ignoble. She wanted to see
her child happy; she wanted Hester to have her
chance, as Ellen said. That she should be seen
and admired and made much of, was, Mrs. John
felt, the first object in her life. It would not be
without some cost to herself, but she did not shrink
from the idea of the lonely evenings she would have
to spend, or the separation that might ensue. Her
mind, which was not a great mind, jumped forward
into an instant calculation of how the evening dresses
could be got, at what sacrifice of ease or comfort.
She did not shrink from this, whatever it might be.
Neither did she let any visionary pride stand in her
way as Hester did. She was ready to forgive, to
forget, to condone all offences&mdash;and in the long discussion
and argument that followed, Mrs. John was
almost more eloquent than Ellen on the mutual
advantages of the contract. She saw them all the
instant they were set before her. She was quite
tremulous with interest and expectation. She ran
over with approval and beaming admiration as Ellen
unfolded her plans. "Oh, yes, I can quite understand;
you want to strike out something original,"
cried Mrs. John. "You must not think I agree with<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_92" id="Page_92">[Pg 92]</a></span>
Hester about Catherine's parties. I think Catherine's
parties are very nice; and relations, you
know, must expect to give way to strangers,
especially when there are not enough of gentlemen;
but it will be much pleasanter for you to
strike out something original. I should have liked
it when I was in your circumstances, but I don't
think I had the energy. And I am sure if Hester
can be of any use&mdash;&mdash; Oh, my darling! of course
you will like it very much. You always are ready
to help, and you have plenty of energy&mdash;far more
than I ever had&mdash;and so fond of dancing too; and
there are so few dances in Redborough. Oh, yes,
I think it is a capital plan, Ellen! and Hester will
be delighted to help you. It will be such an opening
for her," Mrs. John said, with tears of pleasure
in her eyes.</p>

<p>Hester did not say much while the talk ran on.
She was understood to fall into the scheme, and
that was all that was necessary. But when Ellen,
after a prolonged visit and a detailed explanation to
Mrs. John, which she received with the greatest
excitement and interest, of all her arrangements as
to the music, the suppers, and every other particular
they could think of between them, rose to take her
leave, she put her hand within Hester's arm, and
drew her aside for a few confidential words.</p>

<p>"Don't think of coming to the door," she said to
Mrs. John; "it is so cold you must not stir. Hester
will see me out. There is one thing I must say to
you, dear," she added, raising herself to Hester's ear<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_93" id="Page_93">[Pg 93]</a></span>
when they were out of the mother's hearing, "and
you are not to take it amiss. It must be a condition
beforehand&mdash;now please, Hester, mind, and
don't be offended. You must promise me that you
will have nothing to say to either of the boys."</p>

<p>The quick flush of offence sprang to Hester's
face.</p>

<p>"I don't know what you mean. You mean
something you have no right to say, Ellen!"</p>

<p>"I have a very good right to say it&mdash;for I'm a
married lady, and you are only a girl, and of course
I must know best. You are not to have anything
to say to the boys. Any one else you like. I am
sure I don't mind, but will do anything I can to
help&mdash;but not the boys. Oh, I know something
about Harry. I know you have had the sense
to&mdash;&mdash; Well, I don't understand how far it went,
but I suppose it must have gone as far as it could
go, for he's not clever enough to be put off with
anything less than a real No. But you may have
changed your mind, or a hundred things might
happen. And then there's Edward; Aunt Catherine
would be wild if anything got up between you and
Edward. Oh, I think it's always best to speak plain,
and then one has nothing to reproach one's self with
after. She would just be <i>wild</i>, you know. She
thinks there is nobody good enough for him; and
you and she have never got on. Oh, I don't suppose
there's anything between you and Edward. I never
said so; the only thing is you must promise me to
have nothing to say to <i>them</i>. There are plenty of<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_94" id="Page_94">[Pg 94]</a></span>
others&mdash;much better matches, and more eligible:
and it's always a pity to have anything to say to a
cousin in that way. You're sure to set the family by
the ears; and then it narrows the connection, and
you keep always the same name; and there are
ever so many drawbacks. So just you promise me,
Hester, there's a dear&mdash;never," said Ellen, seizing
her with both hands, and giving her a sudden perfumy
kiss, "never!" and the salute was repeated
on the other cheek, "to have <i>anything</i> to say to the
boys&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"The boys! if you think I care anything for the
boys! I shall have nothing to say to anybody," cried
Hester, with indignation, drawing herself out of this
too urgent embrace. Ellen tossed back all her
bracelets, and shook her golden locks and her sealskin
hat, and made an agitation in the air of scent
and sound and movement.</p>

<p>"Oh, that's being a great deal too good," she
cried.</p>

<p>Hester stood at the door, and looked on while Mrs.
Algernon got into her victoria and drew the fur rug
over her, and was driven away, waving the hand and
the bracelets in a parting jingle. The girl was not
envious, but half-contemptuous, feeling herself in
her poverty as much superior to this butterfly in
furs and feathers, as pride could desire. Hester did
little credit to the social gifts, or the popularity or
reputed cleverness in her own way, of her gay
cousin who had been the inspiration of Harry, and
now was the guide of Algernon Merridew. She said<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_95" id="Page_95">[Pg 95]</a></span>
to herself with the downrightness of youth, that
Ellen was a little fool. But her own cheeks were
blazing with this parting dart which had been thrown
at her. The boys! She had a softened feeling of
amity towards Harry, who had done all a stupid
young man could do to overcome the sentence of
disapproval under which Hester was aware she lay.
It had been embarrassing and uncomfortable, and
had made her anything but grateful at the moment;
but now she began to feel that Harry had indeed
behaved like a man, and done all that a man could
to remedy her false position, and give her a substantial
foundation for the native indomitable pride which
none of them could crush, though they did their
best. No; she would have nothing to say to Harry.
She shook her head to herself, and laughed at the
thought, all in the silence of the verandah, where
she stood hazily gazing out through the dim greenish
glass at Ellen, long after Ellen had disappeared.
But Edward! that was a different matter altogether.
She would give no word so far as he was concerned.
Edward was altogether different from Harry. He
piqued and excited her curiosity; he kept her mind
in a tremor of interest. She could not cease thinking
of him when she was in his neighbourhood, wondering
what he would do, what he would say. And if it
did make Catherine <i>wild</i>, as Ellen said, that was but
an inducement the more in Hester's indignant soul.
She had no wish to please Catherine Vernon. There
had not been any love lost between them from the
first, and Hester was glad to think she was not one<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_96" id="Page_96">[Pg 96]</a></span>
of those who had in any way pretended to her kinswoman's
favour. She had never sought Catherine,
never bowed the knee before her. When she went to
the Grange it had been against her will, as a matter
of obedience to her mother, not to Catherine. If it
made Catherine wild to think that there was a friendship,
or any other sentiment between Edward and the
girl whom she had so slighted, then let Catherine be
wild. That was no motive to restrain Hester's freedom
of action. All this passed through her mind as she
stood in the verandah in the cold, gazing after Ellen,
long after Ellen was out of sight. There were many
things which gave her a sort of attraction of repulsion
to Edward. He had tried to deceive Roland
Ashton about her, telling him she was about to
marry Harry, when he knew very well she had
refused to marry Harry. Why had he done it?
And in his manner to herself Edward was two men.
When they were alone he was more than friendly;
he was tender, insinuating, anxious for her approval,
eager to unfold himself to her. But when he saw
her in the Grange drawing-room he never went near
her. In early times she had asked why, and he had
answered with deceiving words, asking how she
thought he could bear to approach her with commonplace
civilities when she was the only creature in the
place for whom he cared at all, a speech which had
pleased Hester at first as something high-flown and
splendid, but which had not preserved its effect as
time went on: for she could not see why he should
not be civil, and show some regard for her presence,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_97" id="Page_97">[Pg 97]</a></span>
even if he could not devote himself to her. And
why could he not devote himself to her? Because
it would displease Catherine. When Catherine was
not present, there was nobody for him but Hester.
When Catherine was there, he was unconscious of
her existence. This, of course, should have shown
clearly to Hester that he was not worthy of her
regard, and to some degree did so. But the conviction
was mingled with so lively a curiosity in
respect to him, so strong an opposition as regarded
her, that Hester's moral judgment was confused
altogether. She was anxious, eager to overcome her
adversary, excited to know what Edward's meaning
was. He would not stand up for her like a true
friend, but at the same time he would never let her
alone, he would still let her see that she was in his
mind. She disliked him, yet&mdash;&mdash; She almost loved
him, but still&mdash;&mdash; Nothing could be more tantalising,
more entirely unlike indifference. To think of
meeting Edward in society, yet not under Catherine's
eye, made her heart beat loudly. She had never
done this hitherto. She had met him by chance on
the Common or in the country roads about, and his
voice had been almost that of a lover. She had met
him before the world, and he had scarcely seemed to
know her. But how could these meetings test what
he meant? This it was that made Ellen's proposal
exciting, even while she herself half scorned it.
Harry? no! Poor Harry! she would not disturb
his peace, nor say a word, nor even look a look
which should put him in jeopardy. But Edward?&mdash;ah!<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_98" id="Page_98">[Pg 98]</a></span>
that was a different matter. It was with all
the vehemence of a quarrel that she snatched at the
chance put into her hands, even when she had
seemed to scorn it. To know what he meant&mdash;to
know what was his real state of mind. If he would
be afraid of what the world would say, as well as of
what Catherine would say&mdash;in that case there was
no scorn which Hester did not feel herself capable
of pouring out upon her unworthy admirer; but if
things proved different? Ah! then she did not
know what softening, what yielding, she might not
be capable of. The very thought melted her heart.</p>

<p>And yet she had thought herself more "interested"
(this was what she called it) in Roland Ashton than
in any man whom she had ever heard of before.
The world had seemed all blank to her when he
went away. His step at the door had made her
heart thrill: the commonplace day had brightened
up into something smiling and sweet when he came
in. But then she had not been fighting a duel with
him half her life as she had been doing with Edward.
She was not curious, <i>intrigu&eacute;e</i>, to know what Roland
meant. She thought (with a blush) that she did
know&mdash;more or less&mdash;what he meant. But Edward
was a sort of sphinx; he was an enemy to be beaten,
a riddle to be read. She said to herself, what would
please her best would be to force him into self-abandonment,
to carry him so out of himself that he
should give up all pretences and own himself at her
disposal, and then to turn her back upon him and
scorn him. Would she have done so? she thought<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_99" id="Page_99">[Pg 99]</a></span>
she would, and that in this lay the secret of her
interest in Edward and his crooked ways. And now,
here was the trial approaching. She would see what
was his true mettle, she would be able indeed to
judge of him now.</p>

<p>"Hester," said Mrs. John appearing at the open
door, "what do you mean by lingering in the cold, to
get your death? You will be chilled to your very
bones. You have not even a shawl on, and in this
cold place. What are you doing? I have called you
three times, and you never paid any attention. Even
to stand here for five minutes freezes me."</p>

<p>"Then don't stand here, mamma," said Hester,
taking hold of her mother's arm and thus leading
her back in the old way. They did not walk about
very much together now. Hester preferred her own
thoughts to her mother's society, and Mrs. John was
not sorry to be left quietly by herself at the fireside.
How long it seemed since the time when she held
her mother's arm clasped in hers whenever she
moved, and used it as a helm to guide that timid
and trustful woman wherever she would! A little
compunction came over her as she made use of that
well-known expedient again, and steered her mother
(all the more gently for that thought) back to her
own chair.</p>

<p>"Yes, yes, dear, this is very comfortable," said
Mrs. John, "but I wish you had come at once, when
I called you, for we must not lose any time in
thinking about your dresses. You must do Ellen
credit, that is one thing clear. I can't have you<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_100" id="Page_100">[Pg 100]</a></span>
dowdy, Hester. The Merridew girls shall not have a
word to say about the Vernons on your account. Oh,
I know they will if they can; they will whisper and
say how proud we all are, and give ourselves airs,
and just look at Hester in a washed muslin! I
would rather go without my dinner," said Mrs. John
with vehemence, "for a whole year."</p>

<p>"But I shall not let you do that, mamma."</p>

<p>"Oh, Hester, just hold your tongue. What do
you know about it? I would rather sell my Indian
shawl, or my pearls&mdash;Dear me, what a good thing I
did not part with my pearls! that is something
nobody can turn up their noses at. And you can say
you got them from your mother, and your grandmother
before her&mdash;which is more than they ever
had. But there are the dresses to be thought of,"
said the tender mother, looking in Hester's face, half
awed, half appealing: for even in the pride of
descent she was forced to remember that you cannot
send your child to a <i>Th&eacute; Dansante</i> with nothing but
a string of pearls round her neck, however fine, and
however long in the family it may have been.</p>

<p>"Dresses! one will do," said Hester, with a little
flush of pleasure, yet determination to repress her
mother's unnecessary liberality. "You forget what
you are talking of, mother dear. One dress is as
much as&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"And to whom do you suppose you are speaking,"
said Mrs. John with dignity; "there are a great
many things which you think you know better than
I. Perhaps you are wrong there too; but I am not<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_101" id="Page_101">[Pg 101]</a></span>
going to bandy words with you. One thing I must
say, than when we talk of ball dresses I know a great
deal better than you. Oh, but I do&mdash;I had to get
everything for myself in old days. Your father
delighted in seeing me fine, but he never pretended
to have any taste. All the responsibility was on me.
Considering that we are poor, and that you are so
young, I should think tulle would do: or even
tarlatan. Hester, I should like you to have silk
slips, that gives a character to a thing at once. A
white one, a pink one, and a blue one&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Dear mamma, a white frock, that is all I want.
I am sure that is all I want; we can't afford any
more. And as for silk slips&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Oh, hold your tongue, Hester, what do you know
about it?" cried Mrs. John, exasperated. "You
have never been at a ball in your life. You can't
know what's wanted, like me. There are quantities
of other things besides. Shoes&mdash;you must have satin
shoes and silk stockings, and gloves, and something
to wear in your hair. I don't even know what's
worn now. We used to have wreaths in my day,
but perhaps that's not the fashion at present. When
I had not a maid&mdash;and of course, poor child, you
have no maid&mdash;I used to have a hair-dresser to do
my hair when I was going out. We wore it quite
high on the top of our heads, and now you wear it
down in the nape of your neck. What a thing
fashion is! We had gigot sleeves all puffed out with
feather cushions, and I used to wear a lace scarf
which was very becoming. We had muslins in my<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_102" id="Page_102">[Pg 102]</a></span>
time, nice clear book-muslins, and when you had
worn it two or three times for balls you just wore it
out in the evenings at home. Tarlatan is not half
so profitable," said Mrs. John, with a very serious
face, "but you must have it, I suppose, all the
same."</p>

<p>"Mother," said Hester, when her mother paused
for breath, "I feel quite horrified at all this. Why
should I dress up so fine for Ellen's parties? I shall
only be a sort of poor relation. My washed muslin
will do very well. Nobody will expect anything
better from me."</p>

<p>"Then that is just why you shall have something
better," said the poor lady, her pale countenance
brightening with a pretty pink flush. "You sha'n't
go at all if you can't go as my daughter should.
You shall have a white first, and then a&mdash;no, not a
pink; pink used to be my colour, for you know I
was pale, and my hair was plain brown, not like
yours. Yours is a little too&mdash;auburn&mdash;for pink.
You must have a blue for your second, with silk
slips made very simply, and tarlatan over that.
White shoes, and white gloves, and my pearls. Oh,
how glad I am I kept my pearls! It will be such a
pleasure, dear, to see you dressed, it will be like old
times again. And you must ask Ellen what to wear
in your hair, a wreath, or just one flower at the side,
with a spray hanging down over your neck. Mr.
Ashton, I am sure, would get it for me in town. For
flowers and those sort of things one should always
send to London. And you must have a fan. I<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_103" id="Page_103">[Pg 103]</a></span>
wonder if my ivory fan would be old-fashioned? I
must ask Ellen. And, dear child, don't stand there
doing nothing when there is not a moment to lose,
but ring for the tea. We must have tea first. I
always feel better after, and then we must put everything
down upon paper, and calculate what it will
cost, and how we are to do."</p>

<p>"I don't want all that," said Hester again: but
the sound of it flattered her youthful ears; for she
was only a girl, when all was said.</p>

<p>"Don't talk any nonsense, child, but ring for the
tea," said Mrs. John, feeling herself for once mistress
of the occasion. "But Hester," she added, in so
solemn a tone that Hester came back half frightened
to hear what it was, "if you ever have children, as
I hope you will, be sure you have one of your girls
taught how to cut out, and to look after the dressmaking.
If we only could have them made at
home, what a saving it would be!"</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_104" id="Page_104">[Pg 104]</a></span></p>




<h2><a name="CHAPTER_VII" id="CHAPTER_VII">CHAPTER XXIII.</a></h2>

<h3>THE FIRST OF THEM.</h3>


<p>Young Mrs. Merridew's <i>Th&eacute;s Dansantes</i> made a
great commotion in Redborough. Dancing teas&mdash;what
did it mean? It meant some nonsense or
another. You might be sure it meant nonsense of
some kind, as it was Ellen Vernon that was at the
bottom of it, the elder people said; but the younger
ones were of a different opinion. It did not matter
to them so much that Ellen Vernon was silly; indeed
the greater part of them were so dazzled by the
furs and the bracelets, and the victoria, if not by
the brilliant fairness and beaming smiles and prettiness
of the bride, that they did not remember Ellen
Vernon had been silly, and thought Mrs. Algernon
Merridew not only the leader of fashion, but the
most amiable and good-natured of all queens of
society, the most "easy to get on with" and most
full of "go." Nothing like her and her dresses,
and her house and her company, had ever been seen
in the quiet, steady-going country town. She made<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_105" id="Page_105">[Pg 105]</a></span>
it known graciously, that she was always at home at
lunch, and there was scarcely a day that a merry
party did not assemble at her house, filling the
newly-furnished pretty room with chatter and
laughter, and all the distracting devices of careless
youth to get rid of a few of its golden hours. And
already there had been half a dozen dinners, far too
soon and quite unnecessary, as all the elders said.
She ought to have waited until everybody had given
her and her husband a dinner before she began to
return their hospitalities. But Ellen had no idea
either of waiting or returning the heavy dinners to
which she, as a daughter of one of the reigning
houses of the town, and her husband as belonging,
if not to that rank, at least to the foremost respectability,
were invited by all the principal people.
The entertainments she gave were reckless young
dinners, where there was no solemnity at all, and
perhaps not much wit, but where laughter abounded
and all sorts of wild schemes of pleasure were invented.
And just as the solid people who had made a
point of having a dinner for the Algernon Merridews
began to feel a little offended at the goings-on of the
young household which paid no attention to ordinary
rules of civility, the younger portion of the population
was thrown into the wildest excitement by
the announcement of the <i>Th&eacute;s Dansantes</i>, and
frowning mothers were courted to smiles again, by
the anticipated pleasure of their children. The old
Merridews, the father and mother, looked on with
pride but misgiving, the brothers and sisters with<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_106" id="Page_106">[Pg 106]</a></span>
pride and delight, as they felt themselves already
rising high upon the topmost wave of society by
means of their brilliant sister-in-law.</p>

<p>"Only mind what you are about and keep hold
on the reins, my boy," old Merridew said to his son,
which Algernon promised with a laughing "Trust
me for that."</p>

<p>"Trust Algy, indeed!" his mother said, shaking
her head. "I would not trust him a step further
that I saw him with that crazy little thing by the
side of him; all my hope is that being a Vernon her
people will step in." They were all sure that no
great harm could happen to a Vernon in Redborough.
Harry, her brother, was always at her side, as faithful
as her husband, backing her up. And Catherine
herself could not disapprove, for she went to the
house now and then, and laughed when she was
spoken to on the subject. "Ellen was always like
that," she said, "wild for pleasure and amusement.
She has asked me to her dancing teas, as an entertainment
quite suited to my years and habits." All
which things reassured the Merridews and the other
anxious persons about.</p>

<p>"And you are going to this dancing tea?" Catherine
Vernon said.</p>

<p>"I suppose so," said Edward, indifferently. "They
would think it strange if I did not go. And they
expect you&mdash;Merridew told me so. He said it would
add such dignity to their little party!"</p>

<p>There was something in the tone with which
Edward said this which Catherine did not like. It<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_107" id="Page_107">[Pg 107]</a></span>
was true that she herself had always represented the
invitation as ludicrous, yet it was quite true that her
presence would have added dignity to the party,
and there was nothing ridiculous in the idea that
Algernon Merridew thought so. This annoyed her
a little, but it was the annoyance of a moment.
She said, "I hope you will enjoy yourself," with a
laugh, which Edward on his side found as offensive:
but he did not betray this, and smiled in reply, as
he knew she meant him to smile, with a sort of
apologetic indulgent air.</p>

<p>"I shall do the best I can," he said, and they both
laughed. She tenderly, thinking how good he was
to take this trouble in order to gratify the frivolous
young pair and keep up the Vernon traditions; he
with a fierce question to herself, why shouldn't he
enjoy it? at least it would be an evening to himself,
with nobody to keep watch over him and make a
note of every girl he danced with. Alas for Catherine!
if she noticed the girls he danced with it was in
order to invite them afterwards (if she approved of
them), for she had no jealous desire to keep him to
herself, but wanted him to marry. But then there was
one at least whom she could never have tolerated.
And the chief point in Edward's anticipations, as in
Hester's, was the freedom of intercourse permitted
under Ellen's easy young wing, and the opportunity
he would have of seeing how the eager, large-eyed
girl would look among other girls, when he could
approach her freely. This gave him something of
the same sense of curiosity which was so warm in<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_108" id="Page_108">[Pg 108]</a></span>
Hester's mind. How would she look among other
girls&mdash;how would she receive him? It did not occur
to him as probable that she would resent that avoidance
of her when under Catherine's eye which he
had so often assured her made him wretched. He
felt that the little secret between them, the stolen
glance he would give her at the Grange parties, the
little shrug with which he pointed her attention to
his bondage, would have an attraction even greater
than had he been always at her side; and in some
sense this was true. But he did not think of Hester's
judgment and of the natural indignation of her high
spirit; neither did he think of the comparison she
made between him and Harry, who had never
hesitated to show his devotion. To compare himself
and Harry, seemed to Edward impossible. A big
idiot&mdash;a nonentity. She had more sense than that.</p>

<p>Never was there such a spectacle seen in Redborough
as the first of the <i>Th&eacute;s Dansantes</i>. The
Merridews' house was near the White House, and
consequently on a little eminence, which answered
all the purposes of a great eminence in that flat
country. It stood in the midst of a little shrubbery
above which it rose on white steps, to make the position
still more commanding. There was a long domed
conservatory at one side, the windows were all plate
glass, and when you consider that within and without
the place was lighted up&mdash;like the Crystal
Palace, people said&mdash;you may imagine something of
the imposing effect. The conservatory was all hung
with Chinese lanterns, and was fairy land to the<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_109" id="Page_109">[Pg 109]</a></span>
young guests inexperienced in such glorious effects;
the two drawing-rooms were both thrown open
for dancing. There were very few chaperons; only
here and there a middle-aged mother, too devoted
to her charge, yawned behind her fan with nobody
to speak to, not a lady of her own age to exchange
experiences with, no elderly gallant to get her a cup
of tea. All was youth, rampant, insolent, careless&mdash;feeling
that the world was made for it, and rejoicing
to shake itself free of every trammel. Mrs. Ellen
set them the example in the most daring way.</p>

<p>"What do we want with the old things here?" she
said; "they would much rather be in bed, and the
best place for them. I don't suppose you mean to do
anything wrong, any of you girls, and if you did they
wouldn't stop you. If you can't take care of yourselves,
if you want a chaperon, there's me. And
there's Fanny Willoughby, and Lilian Melville, and
Maud Seton; they've all been married as long as I
have. Where could you find steadier married women?
and ain't we enough to chaperon a couple of dozen
girls? I never pretend to ask old people, unless it
was just to let them see how everything looks, poor
old things, once in a way."</p>

<p>This being the creed of the mistress of the feast,
it is not to be supposed that her disciples were more
catholic. And there was no limit to the fun which
the young people promised themselves. To do them
justice, it was very innocent fun. The greatest sin
on the conscience of the wildest romp in the place
was that of having danced ten times with a favourite<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_110" id="Page_110">[Pg 110]</a></span>
partner, besides sitting out all the square dances (of
which there were only two) in his company. Algernon
himself had insisted upon two. He said it was
respectable: and he danced both with the least
popular of the young ladies, that they might not feel
themselves slighted, for he was a very good fellow.</p>

<p>"Did you ever see such a muff?" his wife said,
who never condescended to the Lancers. "I do
believe he likes to hop about with the ugliest thing
he can pick up. I thought I had kept out all the
ugly girls, but I haven't succeeded. If there is one,
Algy is sure to find her out."</p>

<p>"To show you that you have no need to be jealous,"
some one said.</p>

<p>"Oh, <i>jealous</i>!" cried Ellen, with supreme disdain.</p>

<p>The young Merridews, brothers and sisters, thought
her the most wonderful creature that had ever been
born. Her light hair was in curls and frizzes (newly
come in and extremely captivating) all over her
head. Her dress was a sort of purple, a colour nobody
but herself ventured to wear, but which threw
up her fairness with the most brilliant effect. She
had all her jewellery on, from the diamonds Harry
had spent all his available money (under her own
directions) in buying for her, to the little bracelet
contributed by the clerks at the bank. Her arm was
covered nearly up to the elbow, and the sound she
made when they fell over her hands and she had to
push them back again was wonderful. It was like a
whole concert of fairy music, the bangles representing
the higher notes, the big golden manacles furnishing<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_111" id="Page_111">[Pg 111]</a></span>
a bass. She liked to hold up her hands and shake
them back with a pretty cry of "Tiresome! Why
is one forced to wear all this upon one?" Ellen said.</p>

<p>And Mrs. John had accomplished her wish. She had
got, if not three, at least two new dresses for Hester,
one upon her shoulders at this moment, the other,
the blue one, laid up all ready in the box. White of
course was the first. It had the silk slip upon which
Mrs. John had set her heart, which was so much
more thrifty than anything else, which could be
covered over again and again, as she pointed out to
her daughter, and which at the present moment was
veiled in floods and billows of tarlatan. Tarlatan
was the fashion of those days: anything that was
limp, that took&mdash;as people now love to say, "nice
folds," being considered utterly dowdy. And when
Hester appeared in those crisp puffings, with her
pearls round her throat, and white flowers in the
hair which her mother called auburn, even young
Mrs. Merridew herself held her breath. She turned
her cousin round and round to examine her.</p>

<p>"Well, I call that a <i>beautiful</i> dress," she said.
"Who put it into your head to get a dress like that?
Why, it is the height of the fashion! Those <i>bouillon&eacute;es</i>
are just the right thing to wear. And do you
mean to say these are real pearls? Oh, go away, or
I shall kill you! Why have I not pearls? They
are far more <i>distingu&eacute;s</i>&mdash;oh, far more!&mdash;than my
paltry bits of diamonds. Oh, take her away, or I shall
not be able to keep my hands off her. And such
flowers! they must have come from Forster's. I am<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_112" id="Page_112">[Pg 112]</a></span>
certain they came from Forster's. Mine are French,
but they are not so pretty," Ellen said.</p>

<p>Hester stood and smiled while these comments
were made, though with a half sense of shame. She
thought it annoyed her very much to be subjected to
such a survey, and so no doubt it would have done
had not the result been so satisfactory; but it is hard
to be really displeased by approbation.</p>

<p>As for Ellen, she whispered behind her hand to
Harry, "The old lady must have a great deal more
than we think for. She must have been saving up.
You don't get a dress like that for nothing."</p>

<p>"It's not the dress&mdash;she always looks nice, whatever
she puts on," said faithful Harry.</p>

<p>His sister contemplated him with eyes full of contempt.
"What is the use of talking to such a silly?"
she said. "Not the dress! She never looked one
ten-thousandth part so well all her life, and that you
know just as well as me."</p>

<p>No, she had never looked so well all her nineteen
years. Her dress was simple indeed, but it was
perfect in all its details, for Mrs. John had remembered
everything. The flowers were artificial, which also
was the fashion then, but they were from Forster's,
procured by Roland Ashton and brought down by his
sister Emma, who had arrived that same afternoon.
The pearls were beautiful, more beautiful than any
other ornament in the room. Hester stood beside
her cousin to receive the guests with a sense that
there were no imperfections about her. In the days
of the washed muslin there was always a fear that the<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_113" id="Page_113">[Pg 113]</a></span>
flounces were not quite even, the bows were not quite
firmly sewed on, or something else which at any
moment might come to pieces and betray the homemadeness
of the garment. But she stood up in her
virgin robes with a sense of delightful security&mdash;a
knowledge that all was complete, which was exhilarating
to her spirits. She was not the one white
swan in this little provincial party: there were faces
quite as lovely as Hester's, which, as a matter of
fact, was not so perfect as her dress; but there was
no one to whom the anticipated pleasure was so
entirely ideal. Her mind did not come down to
practical delights at all. She was going to be happy&mdash;was
she going to be happy? How does it feel to
be happy? These were the questions in her mind.
She had been so, she was aware, as children are,
without knowing it; but this would be conscious,
whatever it was.</p>

<p>The dancing began. It was a very pretty scene,
and Hester, not in herself perhaps so overwhelmingly
gay as the others about her, was caught upon that
stream of careless youth and carried with it in spite of
herself. An atmosphere of pleasure was about her;
eyes looked upon her admiring, almost caressing,
every glance was pleasant; the rougher part of the
world had disappeared altogether. It was as if there
was nothing but merry dancers, laughing engagements,
an interchange of enjoyment, all about. Happy!
Well, she could not say that this was not happiness.
It might be so, for anything she could tell. There
was not much that was ideal about it, but yet&mdash;.<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_114" id="Page_114">[Pg 114]</a></span>
Just as she was thinking this, she felt in a moment of
repose her hand suddenly taken, drawn into some one
else's hand: and, looking round suddenly, saw Edward
close to her, looking at her with a subdued glow in
his eyes, a look of admiration and wonder. It was
quite a steady, straightforward gaze&mdash;not furtive, not
flying. She started at the touch and look, and
attempted to draw away her hand, but it was held
fast. But he had not lifted her hand, he had taken
it where it hung half-veiled by her furbelows, and
he had turned his back towards the company
isolating her in a corner, while he inspected her.
He drew a long breath apparently of satisfaction
and pleasure.</p>

<p>"I am late," he said, "but this was worth waiting
for. Cinderella, where have you left your pumpkin
coach?"</p>

<p>Hester's brow grew dark, her heart seemed to swoon
away in her bosom altogether, then came to itself
again with a rush of heat and indignation. She
wrenched her hand out of that hold, a flood of colour
came to her cheeks.</p>

<p>"I suppose you mean to insult me," she said; "but
this is not a place to insult me&mdash;I am among friends
here."</p>

<p>"Why do you say so, Hester? Insult you! What
an ungenerous thing to say! as if I was in the habit
of doing so, and must not here because you have
friends. What a cruel thing to say!"</p>

<p>"Would you rather have it in your power to insult
me always?" said Hester. Her lip began to quiver<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_115" id="Page_115">[Pg 115]</a></span>
a little. What an odious thing it is to be a woman,
to be always ready, when you would rather not, when
you want to show yourself most strong and angry, to
cry! She clenched her hands tightly to keep herself
down. "I am no cinder-wench, Mr. Edward Vernon,"
she said. "I have given you no reason to call me so.
It is a pitiful thing for a man to notice a girl's dress.
If I am dressed poorly, I am not ashamed of it. It is
not a sin to be poor."</p>

<p>"Hester! a girl of your sense to be so foolish!
How could I mean that? What I meant was, that
you have come out glorious, like the moon from the
clouds. Nothing could be sweeter than that little
house-frock you used to wear out on the Common. I
liked it better than all the finery. But to-night you
are like a young princess. Why did I say Cinderella?
Heaven knows; just because I was dazzled and
bewildered, and because you are a princess; and the
pleasure of seeing you made my head go round. Have
I made my peace? Well then, there's a darling, turn
round and let me see you, that I may see all the
finery, and everything that makes you so lovely, in
detail."</p>

<p>"You may have made it a little better," said Hester;
"but why do you go on talking like that? I am
neither lovely nor a darling; and you shall not say so&mdash;you!
that would not see me if this, instead of being
Ellen's house, were the Grange."</p>

<p>"You have me at your mercy there," said
Edward. "I confess you have me at your mercy,
there."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_116" id="Page_116">[Pg 116]</a></span></p>

<p>Upon which Hester melted a little, and, perceiving
the abashed look which he had put on, began to
falter, and presently found herself guilty of the
commonplace expedient of asking if he did not think
it a pretty scene.</p>

<p>"Oh, very pretty," said Edward; "that is to say, I
don't know anything about it. I looked for one
individual when I came in, and as, as soon as I
found her, she began to bully me violently, I feel a
little muddled, and I don't know what to think. Give
me a little time."</p>

<p>By this time, as was natural, Hester began to
think herself a monster of folly and unkindness, and
to feel that she was ready to sink through the floor
with shame.</p>

<p>"I did not mean to be cross," she said. "I thought&mdash;that
is, I had been looking&mdash;that is&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>Here she stopped, feeling herself get deeper and
deeper into difficulty. Her countenance changed
from the girlish freshness of complexion, which
everybody admired, into a burning red; her eyelids
unable to keep up, her heart beating as if it would
burst through silk slip, and tarlatan <i>bouillon&eacute;e</i>, and
all&mdash;&mdash;</p>

<p>"Come, let us have this dance. I like the music,"
said Edward, drawing her hand suddenly through his
arm.</p>

<p>"But I am engaged."</p>

<p>"Oh, never mind, if you are engaged. You were
engaged to me before ever you came," he said, lightly,
and drew her into the whirl. Hester was at the age<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_117" id="Page_117">[Pg 117]</a></span>
(in society), when, to throw over a partner, looks like
the guiltiest treachery. She could not take any
pleasure in the dance, for thought of it.</p>

<p>"I must go and ask his pardon. I am sure I am
very sorry. I did not intend to be so false; and there
he is, poor man, not dancing."</p>

<p>These words Hester said breathless over the
shoulder of the enterprising intruder, who had carried
her off under the victim's eyes.</p>

<p>"Poor man!" Edward echoed, with a laugh. "I
am glad he has nobody to dance with. What right
had he to engage you? and you regret him; and you
don't want me."</p>

<p>Here Hester rebuked her cousin.</p>

<p>"You have no right to say so. I might want&mdash;I
mean I might like very well to dance with you when
you condescended to ask me; but not to be run away
with, without a word, and made to do a false thing.
False things are what I hate."</p>

<p>"You say that with such meaning. You must be
thinking of more than a dance. Am I one of the false
things you hate?"</p>

<p>"I do not hate you," said Hester, as they came to
a pause, looking doubtfully into his face; "but I do
not think you are very true."</p>

<p>"You mean I don't blurt out everything I mean,
and am capable now and then of keeping something
to myself. I can keep my own counsel&mdash;not like
that fellow there," Edward permitted himself to say:
which was a mistake; for Hester looked up and saw
the gaze of honest Harry dwelling upon her with some<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_118" id="Page_118">[Pg 118]</a></span>
regret, and much tenderness, and was touched at once
with sympathy and indignation.</p>

<p>"If you mean Harry, no one could ever doubt <i>him</i>,"
said Hester, in the warmth of her compunction. "If
he is your friend, he is always your friend. He is not
afraid of what any one says."</p>

<p>"Ah, Hester, you are always harping on that
string," said Edward. "I know what you mean;
but can't you understand the position I am in, and
understand <i>me</i>? Don't you know I am in bondage?
I cannot say my soul is my own. I dare not think
nor feel but as I am told. If I were to follow my
own heart without disguise, I think it would be my
ruin. We will not name any names, but you know.
And I know what you think about that big stupid
there, but you are mistaken. It is not that his heart is
more true. It is that he has not brains enough to see
what is liked and what is not liked. He is not even
sympathetic enough. He does what he likes, and
never considers if it is good for him or not."</p>

<p>"Sympathetic!" cried Hester. "He is sympathetic
with me. When he sees me lonely and neglected he
comes and stands beside me. If he cannot do more,
he does do that. I don't pretend to say that he is
very amusing," she continued, with a laugh, "but he
does what he can. He stands by me. Oh! failing
other things that are better, I like that. Rather than
being sympathetic with Catherine, I like him to
sympathise with me."</p>

<p>"There is no question of names," said Edward,
"We must not get personal. But I am glad you<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_119" id="Page_119">[Pg 119]</a></span>
find Harry amusing. I never heard that he was so
before. He is standing by Ellen now; that's what
he's here for. They will come to grief, these young
people. They are beginning a great deal too fast.
You know young Merridew, or old Merridew either,
can never keep up this. Ellen ought to know better.
But Harry will have scope for this great accomplishment
that you appreciate so highly. He will have to
stand by his sister."</p>

<p>"And he will," Hester said.</p>

<p>She scarcely thought of the dancing, so much did
this conversation&mdash;so unlike a conversation to be
carried on in the whirl of a waltz&mdash;occupy her. It
occurred to her now, as breath failed her, to remember
how in all the accounts of a first ball she had
ever read, the heroine had felt all other sentiments
melt away in the rapturous pleasure of dancing with
the man of her heart. Novels were all Hester's
experience. She remembered this, and it gave her a
half comic, half miserable sensation to realise that she
was not thinking about the dancing at all. She was
carrying on her duel with Edward. There was
always a warm sense of gratification in that&mdash;a stirring
up of all her faculties. She liked to go on
carrying it a step further, defying and puzzling him,
and wondering on his side how much he meant, how
much that he left to be inferred, was true. The
heroine in a novel is generally the point of everybody's
admiration in the ball-room, and to look at
the perfection of the waltz which she and her lover
enjoy so deeply, the whole assemblage stands still.<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_120" id="Page_120">[Pg 120]</a></span>
But nothing of this kind occurred in Hester's case.
As she had so little experience, the chances are that
she was by no means the best dancer in the room,
and certainly Edward was not the other best. Their
waltz was the means of carrying on the discussion
which to both was the most attractive possibility.
When she realised this, Hester was a little amused,
but likewise a good deal disappointed. She felt
a disagreeable limit thus placed to her power to
enjoy.</p>

<p>"Come into the conservatory," Edward said.
"Don't you think you have had enough? Oh, it
is your first ball. I suppose you like it; but I am
beginning to lose my relish for those sort of affairs."</p>

<p>"You are not so old that you should give up
dancing, Cousin Edward."</p>

<p>"Old! No, I hope I am not old yet, and I don't
intend to give up dancing; but I like to walk here
better&mdash;with you. I like to talk better&mdash;with you.
I like to see your face, Hester, and see how it
changes from kindness to wrath, from friendship to
indignation, from a patient sense that I am endurable,
to a violent consciousness&mdash;&mdash; Come and sit
here."</p>

<p>"You seem to think I never do anything but
think of you: and that is the greatest mistake,"
Hester said.</p>

<p>Upon which he laughed. The place he had led
her to was only partially lighted. There were many
other groups scattered about among the plants and
stands of flowers. Flirtation was openly recognised<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_121" id="Page_121">[Pg 121]</a></span>
in this youthful house as one of the portions of the
evening's entertainment, and large provision made
for it. There was nobody to notice with whom it
was that Edward was amusing himself, and he felt
fully disposed to take advantage of his opportunities.
He laughed at Hester's indignant disclosures. "If
you did not think a little about me, dear, you would
not notice so distinctly my course of conduct in other
places, you could not be sure that it was much more
agreeable to me, instead of standing by your side
and trying to be as amusing as Harry, to lead down
Mrs. Houseman and old Lady Kearney to supper
or to tea."</p>

<p>"My mother should go out of the room before
either of them," cried Hester. "Do you know who
she is? Sir John Westwood is her cousin: a duke's
daughter once married into her family&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"I quite understand you and agree with you,
Hester. It is nothing that she is a perfect little
gentlewoman, and has far better manners than any
of us; but because she is a cousin to a heavy
baronet, who is not good enough to tie her
shoe&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Edward!" The girl was so startled she could
not believe her ears.</p>

<p>"Oh, I know very well what I am saying. You
don't know me, that is all. You think I am a
natural snob, when I am only a snob by circumstances.
You yourself, Hester, do you really think
your mother should stand upon her cousin and upon
Lady Ethelinda (or whatever was her name), her<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_122" id="Page_122">[Pg 122]</a></span>
great-grandmother, and not upon herself far better
than either? I can't imagine you think that."</p>

<p>Hester was surprised and silenced for the moment.
She had been so often reminded of the noble grandmother
and the baronet cousin, and so hard put to
it to find a ground of superiority on which her pride
could take refuge, that this sudden appeal to her
better judgment bewildered her. She was startled
to find those advantages which were indisputable,
and to which everybody deferred in theory, so
boldly under-valued; but yet the manner of doing it
made her heart beat with pleasure. Yes; people
thought her dear little mother silly, and Hester was
aware that she was not clever. Sometimes, in the
depths of her own soul, she had chafed, as children
will, at the poor lady's dulness and slowness of
comprehension; but she <i>was</i> a perfect little gentlewoman.
And he saw it! He felt in his heart that
she was above them all&mdash;not because of Lady
Ethelinda (she was Lady Sarah in reality) and Sir
John, but herself.</p>

<p>"I did not know you were a Radical," she said.
She knew nothing about Radicals, though instinctively
in her heart she agreed with them. "I
thought you cared for family and that sort of
thing."</p>

<p>"Do you?"</p>

<p>Hester paused. She flung higher her young head,
which was proud with life and a sense of power
unknown. "I should like to be a king's daughter,"
she said, "or a great soldier's or a great statesman's.<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_123" id="Page_123">[Pg 123]</a></span>
I should like my name to mean something. I should
like people to say, when they hear it, that is&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"But you don't care much about Sir John?&mdash;that
is what I thought. I am no Radical; I am all for
decorum and established order and church and state.
How could you doubt that? But, by the way, there
is a person whom neither of us like, who certainly
has the kind of rank you prize. Don't you know
who I mean, Hester? When a stranger comes to
Redborough, there is one name he is sure to hear.
If she were a duchess she could not be better
known. To be her relation carries a certain weight.
We were always a leading family in the place, I
suppose. But why are we, for instance, so much
better than the Merridews and all the rest of the
respectable people? She has something to do with
it, I can't deny, though I don't like her any more
than you."</p>

<p>"Edward," cried Hester breathlessly, "about that
we ought to understand each other. I have no
reason to like Catherine. Yes, I will say her name;
why shouldn't I? She has not liked me. I was
only a child, and if I was saucy she might have
forgiven me, all these years. But she has taken the
trouble on the contrary to humiliate me, to make
me feel that I am nobody, which was unworthy. But
you: she has been kind to you. She has been more
than kind&mdash;she has loved you. I have seen it in
her eyes. She thinks that nobody is worth thinking
of in comparison with you. If&mdash;if&mdash;who shall I
say?&mdash;if Sir Walter Scott came here, or Mr.<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_124" id="Page_124">[Pg 124]</a></span>
Tennyson, she would rather have you. And yet,
you that ought to be so grateful, that ought to love
her back, that ought to be proud&mdash;oh, I should if
I were you. If she were fond of me I should be
proud. I hate all those wretched people who take
from her hand, and then sneer and snarl at her, like
dogs&mdash;no, not like dogs: dogs are far nobler&mdash;like
cats; that is better."</p>

<p>Hester's eyes were shining with eloquence and
ardour; the little movement of her head so proud,
so animated, so full of visionary passion, threw back
and gave a certain freedom to the hair which her
mother called auburn. Her whole figure was full
of that force and meaning which is above beauty.
Edward looked at her with smiling admiration. If
his conscience was touched, or his temper at least,
he did not show it.</p>

<p>"Do you call me a cat?" he said.</p>

<p>"Oh, I am not in fun. I am as earnest as ever
I can be. It is wicked, it is miserable, and I cannot
understand you. All the others are as nothing in
comparison with you."</p>

<p>He grew a little pale under this accusation; he
would not meet it directly. "But you know," he
said, "why she hates you. It is for your mother's
sake."</p>

<p>"My mother!" cried Hester astonished. "But
no one could hate my mother." The suggestion
took away her breath.</p>

<p>"It is true, all the same. I thought you did not
know. She was to have married John Vernon, your<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_125" id="Page_125">[Pg 125]</a></span>
father, and he preferred&mdash;&mdash;that is the whole account
of it; then he got into trouble, and she had her
revenge."</p>

<p>"Did she ruin my father?" said Hester in a low
whisper of horror.</p>

<p>"I&mdash;don't know if it went so far as that," Edward
said.</p>

<p>A hesitation was in his speech. It was scarcely
compunction, but doubt, lest a statement of this
kind, so easily to be contradicted, might be injudicious
on his part&mdash;but then, who would speak to
Hester on such a subject? And her mother was a
little fool, and, most likely, did not know, or would
be sure to mistake, the circumstances.</p>

<p>"Don't let us talk of that: it is so long past,"
he said; "and here is a wretch, a scoundrel, coming
up with his eye fixed upon you as if he was a
partner. How I loathe all your partners, Hester!
Mind, the rest of the dances are for me. I shall
watch for you as soon as you have shaken that
fellow off."</p>

<p>But Hester did not care for the dances that
followed. She went through them indifferently,
faithful to the partners who had presented themselves
before he came on the scene; and, indeed, the
conversation in the conservatory had not drawn
her nearer to Edward. It had given her a great
deal to think of. She had not time in the whirl
and fluster of this gaiety to think it all out.</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_126" id="Page_126">[Pg 126]</a></span></p>




<h2><a name="CHAPTER_VIII" id="CHAPTER_VIII">CHAPTER XXIV.</a></h2>

<h3>A NEW COMPETITOR.</h3>


<p>Emma Ashton had brought Hester's flowers, and
though she was tired with her journey, had taken
a great deal of interest in Hester's dress. When
she came in to show herself to the old people in her
white robes before her ball, the stranger had surveyed
her with much attention. She had kissed her slowly
and deliberately when introduced to her.</p>

<p>"Roland told me a great deal about you," she
said. "I suppose we are cousins too. You look
very nice. I hope you will enjoy yourself." She
was a very deliberate, measured talker, doing everything
steadily. When Hester was gone, she resumed
her seat beside her grandmother.</p>

<p>"Roland admires her very much. She is pretty,
but I should think she had a great deal of temper,"
Emma said.</p>

<p>"Temper is scarcely the word. She is a great
favourite with your grandfather&mdash;and with me too&mdash;with
me too."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_127" id="Page_127">[Pg 127]</a></span></p>

<p>"Roland told me," said Emma. "When I say
temper I don't mean any harm. She would do
much better for Roland if she had a good deal of
temper. That is what he wants to keep him
straight; for a man ought not to flirt after he is
married, and he will, unless she keeps him in
order."</p>

<p>"Married! but is he likely to marry? I did not
hear anything of it."</p>

<p>"When a man can keep a sister he can keep a
wife," said Emma, announcing this fact as if it were
an oracle. "He has a house, and everything that is
necessary. And of course I shall not stand in his
way. I can go back to Elinor, where I am a sort of
head nurse, and cheap enough at the money; or I
can be a governess. That touches his pride&mdash;he
does not like that."</p>

<p>Here the old captain came back, who had been
putting his favourite carefully into the fly.</p>

<p>"Why has she not her mother with her?" he
said. "I like a girl to have her mother with her.
It is pretty, it is natural. I do not like those
new-fashioned, independent ways."</p>

<p>"But they are much more convenient, grandpapa,"
said Emma. "Think how I should have been situated
had a girl always wanted her mother with her.
Elinor, with her family, cannot always be going out;
and when she goes she likes to amuse herself, she
does not go for me. A girl going out with her
mother means a devoted sort of old lady like the
mothers in books. Such nonsense, you know&mdash;for<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_128" id="Page_128">[Pg 128]</a></span>
a girl's mother, when she is eighteen or so, is rarely
more than forty, and people of forty like amusement
just as much as we do. It is better, on the whole, I
think, when every one is for herself."</p>

<p>"Well, that is not my opinion," said the old
captain, shortly.</p>

<p>He was accustomed to do most of the talking
himself, and it startled him to have it thus taken
out of his hand.</p>

<p>"I suppose an invitation will come for me," said
Emma calmly, "as soon as they know I am here;
and then Hester and I can go together. Roland said
there was no dancing, but I think it always safest to
bring a ball-dress. It is not heavy, though it takes
up a good deal of room; but then you can always
take one box into the carriage, and the railway
only charges by weight."</p>

<p>"Roland is very busy, I suppose, my dear. You
only see him in the evening?"</p>

<p>"I don't always see him in the evening. He has
his own friends, and I am getting a few acquaintances
too. If he gives me my living and very little
to do I ought to be grateful to him, but I would
not let him give up his own amusements for me.
That wouldn't be fair. Oh yes, he is very busy.
He has found so many new people to do business
for down here."</p>

<p>"I hope to goodness he won't speculate with
their money and ruin them," Captain Morgan
said.</p>

<p>"Ruin! oh, I hope not. But Roland says there<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_129" id="Page_129">[Pg 129]</a></span>
is nothing so exciting as to be on the verge of
ruin. He says it is better than a play: for instead
of looking on at the acting, the acting is going on
inside of you. But it is his trade to speculate,
isn't it, grandpapa? That is what he is there for,
and he is very good at it they say. I suppose
this girl has not any money? When they are
pretty and nice they seldom have."</p>

<p>"What girl?" said Captain Morgan, almost
haughtily&mdash;as haughtily and harshly as the old
gentleman could persuade himself to speak.</p>

<p>"Doesn't he know, grandmamma?" said Emma,
"the girl Roland admired so much: and she would
just do for him, if she had some money: but so
nice looking as he is, and so well established in
business, I don't think, unless there is money, he
should throw himself away."</p>

<p>"Is it Hester Vernon that you mean?" asked
the captain in an angry voice.</p>

<p>"She does not mean any harm, Rowley. Don't
you see Hester is just to her an abstract person,
not the dear girl she is to you and me. And
Emma," said the old lady almost with timidity,
"I fear your ball-dress will not be of much use.
Mrs. Merridew will not think of inviting you&mdash;she
will not perhaps know you are here."</p>

<p>"Roland met her, grandmamma," said Emma
calmly. "He told me; we are all cousins, I
believe. She will be sure to invite me, or if not,
you will be able to get me an invitation. People
always exert themselves to get invitations for girls.<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_130" id="Page_130">[Pg 130]</a></span>
It is like helping young men on in business. We
cannot go and make acquaintances for ourselves
as young men go and set up offices, but we must
have our chance, you know, as well. Of course,"
said Emma in her deliberate way, "it is for everybody's
advantage that we should have our chance
as well as the men."</p>

<p>"And what do you call your chance?" said
Captain Morgan. He planted himself in the front
of the fireplace with his legs very wide apart, which,
as his wife well understood, meant war.</p>

<p>"My old man," she said, "what do you know
about the talk of girls? They have one way of
thinking, and we have another. They are young,
and we are old."</p>

<p>"Hester is younger than she is," said the captain,
"let her alone. She is as ready to talk as there is
any need to be."</p>

<p>"My chance, grandpapa?" said Emma with a
slow little laugh. "It is not necessary, is it, to
explain? a girl's chance is in making&mdash;friends. If
one goes for a governess one's family does not like
it. They would rather you were your sister's head
nurse with all the trouble, and without any pay.
Roland has taken me now&mdash;and I do not require to
work for my living; but it is not so very cheerful
with Roland that I should not wish&mdash;if I could&mdash;to
make a change. We must all think of ourselves
you know."</p>

<p>"My dear," said the old lady in her soft voice,
"in one way that is very true."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_131" id="Page_131">[Pg 131]</a></span></p>

<p>"It is very true, I think, in every way. It
might be cheerful for me if Roland were to spend
his evenings at home as Tom Pinch in Dickens did
with his sister. But then Roland is not a bit like
Tom Pinch, and I said to him when I came, 'You
are not to change your life for me.' So that sometimes,
you know, I am in the house all alone all
day, and then if he is out to dinner, or if he has
any evening engagement, I am alone all the night.
And if he were to marry, why there would be an
end of me altogether. So you see, grandmamma,
wherever I am, it is very natural that I should
wish to have my chance."</p>

<p>"How old are you?" said the captain abruptly.</p>

<p>"I shall be twenty-three at Christmas," said
Emma, raising her eyes to his face. She was
curious to know why he asked&mdash;whether he
thought her older, or younger than her age,
whether he thought it was strange she should
still be unmarried. "I was kept very much out
of sight when I was with Elinor," she said half
apologetically. She had not had her "chance" as
she had always wished to have. She had not been
very well treated she felt in this life, the youngest
of seven. She had been passed on from one to
another of her married sisters to make herself
useful. All of them had said that Emma must
"come out," but no one had taken any trouble
about it. She had to scramble for a dress, a very
cheap one, and to coax Elinor into taking her to
some little local merrymaking, and so opening, as<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_132" id="Page_132">[Pg 132]</a></span>
it were, the gates of society. As soon as she could
say that she was "out" Emma had kept the idea
of having "her chance" of making friends and
getting invitations always before her. But her
opportunities had not been great, and Elinor had
not devoted herself to her younger sister. She
was still young enough to amuse herself, and it had
not occurred to her to put so unimportant a person
as Emma in the foreground. So that she had
never been allowed to have much of a "chance."
Emma had not much experience of the world.
Of the many novels she had read, and which
were her guides to life, a great many devoted
themselves to the history and description of young
ladies at whose entrance into a ball-room every
man present fell metaphorically on his knees.
She was acquainted with many evening parties in
fiction at which the fate of countless young men
and women was decided. The smallest dance
would be represented there as bringing people
together who were never more to be sundered.
Emma herself had not produced any such sensation
at the small parties she had hitherto gone to, but
she felt that this glory must be awaiting her,
and especially that in a new place like this Redborough,
in some waltz or other, among some
unknown assembly she should meet her fate.</p>

<p>This being the case, it is not to be wondered at
that she should lose no time in announcing her certainty
of an invitation to anything so likely to
conduce to such an object as Ellen Merridew's dancing<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_133" id="Page_133">[Pg 133]</a></span>
teas. She had come down to Redborough prepared
to be cousin to all the world. Roland, indeed, had
taken pains to explain that Catherine Vernon's
cousins were not actually <i>her</i> cousins, but she had
thought it better in many ways to ignore this, and
to descend upon the new scene with the most amiable
disposition to embrace as a near relative every Vernon
presented to her. Among them all, what could be
more likely than that her fate should be found? She
meant no harm to anybody. It would be doing no
harm, certainly, if any young man fell in love with
her, to make him happy by marrying him. She felt
most strongly the supreme necessity of marrying for
her own part. She had no disguise with herself on
this subject, and with her grandparents she did not
think it necessary to have any disguise. Everything
was involved in it. Roland had taken the responsibility
of her upon himself and given her a home,
with very little to do, and enough to make her sufficiently
comfortable. Emma had always been brought
up to consider everything from a strictly practical
point of view. She had been taught to believe that
she had no right to anything, that it was out of their
bounty and charity that her brothers and sisters, now
one, now another, afforded her a temporary home.
And she was very comfortable with Roland&mdash;but if
he were to marry, what then? The comfort of having
a home of her own, a husband of her own with a
settled income, was to Emma in prospect the crown
of all good things. She would not have been ashamed
to say so if necessary; and it was in balls and parties<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_134" id="Page_134">[Pg 134]</a></span>
and picnics and social meetings generally, that a
young woman had her chance of suddenly obtaining,
by looking pretty, by making herself agreeable, all
these good things at a stroke. She made up her
mind at once that heaven and earth must be moved
to get her an invitation to Mrs. Algernon Merridew's
<i>Th&eacute;s Dansantes</i>. She would not take, she said to
herself, any denial. She would see all the Redborough
people there, among whom there must certainly
be some individuals of the class upon which
depended Emma's fate. As she sat unfolding so
much of this as was needful with a calm confidence
in being understood, her grandparents, with a sort of
stupefaction, listened and looked on. Emma was
knitting all the time in the German way, with a very
slight swift movement of her fingers and without
looking at her work. She spoke slowly, with an air
of such undoubted fact and practical commonplace
about her, that those two old people, who each in
their several ways indulged in fancy and sentiment,
were daunted and silenced. Emma spoke in a sort
of saintly simplicity, as not knowing that anything
beyond those solid primitive foundations, anything
like sentiment or fancy, was in the world.</p>

<p>She was not handsome like her brother, and yet
there was something remarkable about her appearance
which some people admired. Her hair was
dark, her features sufficiently good. The strange
thing in her was her eyes, which were very light in
colour&mdash;so light, that sometimes there seemed no
colour at all in them. This was not beautiful, but<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_135" id="Page_135">[Pg 135]</a></span>
it was <i>bizarre</i> and unusual, and as such Emma had
her admirers. But it was only in this particular,
not in mind or thoughts, that there was anything in
her out of the way.</p>

<p>"Well?" said the old captain to his wife, when,
after having yawned softly over her work as a signal
and preparation for bed-going, Emma rose with a
smile at half-past ten, and kissed them both, and
asked if she might have her candle. "I must not
keep you out of bed," she said, with that look of
complacent consideration which, notwithstanding, was
quite innocent and referred to her own circumscribed
horizon, in which everything connected with herself
was well in the foreground. Mrs. Morgan did not
meet her husband's eye as she had met it when
Roland was the visitor.</p>

<p>"She has not been well brought up, poor thing!"
the old lady said. "She has had no one to care for
her&mdash;and, Rowley, she is our own flesh and blood."</p>

<p>"That's the wonderful thing," the captain said,
"Katie's child! My dear, I give it up; there seems
no reason and no sense in it. I cannot think what
the Lord can mean."</p>

<p>"Oh, hush, Rowley&mdash;nothing, nothing that is not
good."</p>

<p>"One would say&mdash;that there must be just a crowd
of souls ready to put into the new little bodies, and
that one must slip down before the other that ought
to come;&mdash;like that vile cad, you know, that slipped
into the pool of Siloam before the poor fellow that
had no servant could shuffle down."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_136" id="Page_136">[Pg 136]</a></span></p>

<p>"And that was all the better for your poor fellow
as it turned out, Rowley, for he got his healing more
sweetly out of the very hand&mdash;&mdash; And, poor little
spirit, if it was not intended for this body, I can't
think it has got very much by its deceit," Mrs.
Morgan said, with a little laugh.</p>

<p>But the captain did not laugh. There was consternation
in his soul.</p>

<p>"A girl," he said, "with her eyes open to all
chances, looking out for a husband, and seriously
thinking that is the right thing to do&mdash;to come from
you and me, Mary&mdash;to come from you and me!"</p>

<p>The old lady gave him her hands that he might
help her out of her chair, and when she stood upright,
tottering a little&mdash;for she was not strong upon
her legs&mdash;she gave him a little playful tap with her
finger upon his old cheek.</p>

<p>"You are just a high-flown old sentimentalist,"
she said. "There is no harm in her. She is only
prose to your poetry&mdash;which I've always been all our
lives, and you've said so many a day."</p>

<p>"Don't blaspheme, old woman, don't blaspheme,"
the captain said.</p>

<p>But next day, when Hester came in to give them
the account&mdash;which she knew the old people would
expect&mdash;of all that had happened, Emma lost no
time in making her desires known.</p>

<p>"It must have been a very pretty party," she
said; "a conservatory lighted like that is always so
nice. It is cool to sit in after you have got heated
with dancing. I wish I could have seen you all<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_137" id="Page_137">[Pg 137]</a></span>
enjoying yourselves. I am so fond of dancing, and
I don't get much; for Roland does not care for
dancing parties, and at Waltham Elinor never had
time. I suppose you had an invitation, grandmamma,
though you are too old to go?"</p>

<p>Here Hester explained, wondering, that there were
very few chaperons, and nobody asked but people
who were known to dance.</p>

<p>"Ellen says it only tires the others, and what is
the use?" Hester said.</p>

<p>"That is very true; she must be judicious&mdash;she
must have right notions. When do you think
my invitation will come, grandmamma? I suppose
people will call when they know I am here?"</p>

<p>Here there was a little pause, for even Mrs.
Morgan was taken aback by this question, and did
not know what to say.</p>

<p>"I am sure," said Hester blushing, after a
minute's silence, "that if Miss Ashton would&mdash;like
it so very much&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Oh, I should, of course, <i>very</i> much. I want to
know the Redborough people. I like to know the
people wherever I go. It is so dull knowing no one,"
Emma said. "And then it would be so convenient,
you know, for I could go with&mdash;you&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>To this Hester did not know what to reply; but
it was well in one way that the new comer took it
all for granted and gave no trouble. Emma made
no account of embarrassed looks and hesitating
replies. She did not even notice them, but pursued
her own way deliberately, impervious to any<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_138" id="Page_138">[Pg 138]</a></span>
discouragement, which was more equivocal than a
flat "No." She had been used to "noes" very flat
and uncompromising, and everything less seemed to
her to mean assent. When she had disposed, as
she thought, of this question, she went on to
another which was of still greater importance.</p>

<p>"But I cannot expect Cousin Catherine to call
upon me," she said composedly. "She is too old,
and she is always treated as a kind of princess,
Roland says. And you are too old to take me,
grandmamma. Perhaps I could go with Hester.
Would that be the right thing? For they all say
I must not neglect Cousin Catherine."</p>

<p>Hester looked aghast upon the young woman, who
contemplated them so calmly over her knitting, and
talked of neglecting Catherine, and being called upon
by the sovereign of society, who left even the Redborough
magnates out, and called only upon those
who pleased her. Emma went on quite placidly, knitting
with the ends of her fingers in that phlegmatic
German way, which is an offence to English knitters.
The stocking went on dropping in longer and longer
lengths from her hands, as if twirling upon a leisurely
wheel. She had explained that they were knickerbocker
stockings, for Elinor's boys, which she was
always busy with.</p>

<p>"She gives me so much for them, for every dozen
pairs&mdash;and the wool; I make a little by it, and it is
much cheaper for her than the shops."</p>

<p>"Your grandfather will take you&mdash;some day," said
Mrs. Morgan hastily.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_139" id="Page_139">[Pg 139]</a></span></p>

<p>"Oh, that will do very well, but it ought to be
soon," Emma said. She returned to the subject
after Hester had given a further account of the
merrymaking of the previous night.</p>

<p>"Are you all great friends?" said Emma, "or are
there little factions as there generally are in families?
Elinor and William's wife used always to be having
tiffs, and then the rest of us had to take sides. I
never would. I thought it was wisest not. I was
nobody, you know, only the youngest. And when
one has to stay a few months here and a few months
there, without any home of one's own, it is best to
keep out of all these quarrels, don't you think,
grandmamma? Roland said there were some old
things living here, some old maids that were spiteful."</p>

<p>Now it is curious enough that though the Miss
Vernon-Ridgways were not at all approved by their
neighbours, it gave these ladies a shock to hear an
outsider describe them thus.</p>

<p>"Never mind that," said Mrs. Morgan, almost
impatiently. "Are you going further, Hester? If
you want my old man, tell him not to stay out too
long, for the wind is cold to-day."</p>

<p>"I am going to Redborough," Hester said. "I
have some things to do for mamma."</p>

<p>"Oh, you must take me with you," said Emma&mdash;"just
one moment till I have turned this heel. I
never like to leave a heel midway. I want to see
Redborough of all things. Grandmamma, you will
not mind me leaving you&mdash;I want to see all I can,
as I don't know how long I may stay."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_140" id="Page_140">[Pg 140]</a></span></p>

<p>"Do you mind, Hester?" the old lady said in a
little alarm, as having finished the heel, and put her
knitting carefully away in a long basket made to
hold the length of her needles, Emma went up stairs
to get her hat. Hester laughed a little and hesitated,
for though she was not moved to enthusiasm by
Emma, she was young enough to like the novelty of
a new companion, whoever that might be.</p>

<p>"I hope she will not make me take her to see
Catherine. Catherine would not be very gracious
to any one whom I brought her. Dear Mrs.
Morgan, I wanted to ask you&mdash;Was Catherine&mdash;&mdash;Did
Catherine&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"What, my dear?"</p>

<p>"Nothing&mdash;I can't tell you before any one. It
was something I heard from&mdash;&mdash;last night. Yes, I
am quite ready, Miss Ashton," Hester said.</p>

<p>"It is grand to be called Miss Ashton, but I wish
you would say Emma. It makes me feel as if I were
some one's governess when you say Miss Ashton. I
nearly was," said Emma. "You know we are a
large family, eight of us, and we had no money. I
am sure I can't tell how we managed to grow up.
It was thanks to Elinor I believe; she was the only
one who could manage papa. And now they are all
provided for, but only me. Elinor and Bee made
very good marriages, and Kate didn't do so badly
either, but she's gone to India. The others were to
help me between them, but that is not very nice.
They are always scheming to have as little of you as
they can, and to make the others have too much. I<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_141" id="Page_141">[Pg 141]</a></span>
never would give in to that. I always kept to my
day. I used to say 'No, Bee, my time is up. I
don't mind where you put me (for I never made any
fuss in that sort of way, it turns the servants against
you), I can sleep anywhere, but you must keep your
turn. Elinor sha'n't be put upon if I can help it,'
and the short and the long of it was that I had as
nearly as possible taken a governess's place."</p>

<p>"That would have been better surely&mdash;to be
independent," Hester said.</p>

<p>"In some ways. To have a paid salary would be
very nice&mdash;but it hurts a girl's chance. Oh, yes, it
does," said Emma, "there is no doubt of it: people
say not when they want to coax you into it, but it
does&mdash;and as all the others have married so well,
of course I was very unwilling to do anything to
damage my chance."</p>

<p>"What was your chance?" said Hester with a set
countenance: partly she did not know, and partly
from the context she divined, and meant to crush her
companion with lofty indignation: but Emma was
not quick enough to perceive the moral disapproval.
She was not even conscious that it was possible to
disapprove of such an elemental necessity.</p>

<p>"Oh, you know very well," she said with a little
laugh. "I have never been a flirt. I haven't got
any inclination that way. Of course in my position
I would think it my duty to consider any offer. But I
was very nearly driven to the governessing," she continued
calmly. "Elinor had visitors coming, and
Bee was so ill-natured as to start painting and<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_142" id="Page_142">[Pg 142]</a></span>
papering just as I was due there. Can you imagine
anything more nasty? just to be able to say she
could not take me in! I just said I must take a
situation, and they were in a way. But I do really
believe I should have done it had it not been for
Roland. He said it would suit him very well to
have me. He had just got a house of his own, you
know, and I could be of use to him. So he took me,
which was very kind. It is a little dull after being
used to children, but I have scarcely anything to do,
and he gives me a little allowance for my clothes.
Don't you think it is very kind?"</p>

<p>"I would much rather be a governess," Hester said
with a glow of indignant pride. This matter-of-fact
description of the state of dependence, which was
made without any sense of injury at all, with the
composure of an individual fully capable of holding
her own and looking for nothing else, had an effect
upon her sensitive mind which it is impossible to
describe. She shrank from the revelation as if it
had been something terrible; and yet it was not
terrible at all, but the most calm historic account of
a state of affairs which seemed perfectly natural to
every one concerned. Emma knew that she would
herself have employed any possible expedient to get
rid of an unnecessary member of her household,
especially such a detrimental as "the youngest"&mdash;and
she was not angry with Bee.</p>

<p>"Ah, you don't know children," said Emma
serenely. "I have been used to them all my life,
and I know what demons they are; and then it does<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_143" id="Page_143">[Pg 143]</a></span>
so spoil your chances in life. Being with Roland is
very nice you know, he never orders me about, and
he gives me an allowance for my clothes, as I told
you. But it is much duller. At Elinor's and Bee's,
and even at William's, there's a little life going on.
Now and then you can't help seeing people. Even
when your sisters don't wish it, people will ask you
out when they know you're there. And I must say
that for Elinor, that when she's not worried she does
take a little trouble about you, and always likes to
see you look nice. To be sure with five boys and a
husband in business, she is worried," Emma added
with impartiality, "most of the time. What is that
big house, that red one, so near the road? Nice
people ought to live there."</p>

<p>"That is the Grange," said Hester, with a sudden
flush, "that is Catherine Vernon's house."</p>

<p>"Oh&mdash;h! But then why should I lose any time?
It would look better that I should go at once, the
very first day. I suppose you run in whenever you
please."</p>

<p>Hester's countenance flamed more than ever. "I
never go&mdash;except when I go with my mother.
Catherine would not care to see you with me. She
is very fond of your grandfather and grandmother&mdash;but
not so fond of us. And she is quite right, we
don't deserve it so much," Hester said, flinging back
her young head with that movement of natural pride
which belonged to her. Just then, to make the
situation more complicated, Edward came out from
the gate, and seeing the two figures on the road,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_144" id="Page_144">[Pg 144]</a></span>
hesitated for a moment, conscious of Catherine's eye
behind him, and Hester's keen consciousness before.</p>

<p>"Oh," said Emma again, "then there <i>are</i> factions?
I am sure I am very glad grandpapa is on Catherine's
side; for Elinor said, and then Roland told me&mdash;&mdash; Who
is that? Oh, then, there are <i>men</i> there? I
thought she lived alone. He looks rather nice,
though I like men to be taller than that. Mind you
introduce me, and walk a little faster please, before
he gets away."</p>

<p>Hester's response to this was naturally the indignant
one of walking more slowly, so as to give the
hesitating figure at the gate full time to get away.
But Edward had thought better of it. On the whole,
he found it more undesirable to encounter Hester's
disdain than anything Catherine would be likely to
say. And just at that hour after luncheon Catherine
generally abandoned her seat in the window. It was
true that he very seldom came back to lunch. He
advanced accordingly a few steps from the door, and
held out his hand. "I am glad to see you are none
the worse of our dissipations last night," he said.</p>

<p>"Introduce me," said Emma, keeping her place
close to Hester's side, "we are all cousins together,
though we don't know each other. I wanted to go
in at once to see Cousin Catherine, whom I have
heard of all my life; but she will not let me. Perhaps
you will mention it to Cousin Catherine. I will
come as soon as I can get grandpapa to bring me. It
is so much more formal than I thought. Among
relations generally one runs out and in, and never<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_145" id="Page_145">[Pg 145]</a></span>
thinks twice, but that does not seem to be your
way here."</p>

<p>"No, it is not our way here. We hold each other
at arm's length. We are not even civil if we can
help it," said Edward, with a laugh and a glance at
Hester, who stood, the impersonation of unwilling
politeness, holding herself back, in an attitude which
said as plainly as words, that though their way was
the same she did not choose to be accompanied, by
him, along even that common way.</p>

<p>"I see," said Emma. "I am sure I am very sorry
I made you stand and talk, Hester, when you dislike
it so much. Of course, among relations one understands
all that. Do you live here? I remember
now Roland told me there were some gentlemen-cousins,
but I am quite a stranger, and I don't know
anything. Hester is going to take me to see the
little town."</p>

<p>"You must not say 'little town' to any of the
Redborough people, Miss Ashton."</p>

<p>"Oh, mustn't I? At Waltham nobody minds. I
should like to see the Bank where all the Vernon
money comes from. The Vernon money has never
done us any good I believe, but still when one is
connected with money one likes to see all about it at
least. Do you think, Hester, this gentleman would
be so good as to see about my invitation? I don't
know if Mrs. &mdash;&mdash;, I forget her name, who gives the
dances&mdash;is your sister, Mr. Vernon."</p>

<p>"Mrs. Merridew is my cousin," said Edward.</p>

<p>"Oh, cousin, is it? I suppose we are all cousins.<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_146" id="Page_146">[Pg 146]</a></span>
Naturally I should like an invitation: but I suppose
it is because of the splits in the family, grandmamma
doesn't seem to wish to do anything about it, and
Hester hesitated, you know, just as you hesitated,
Mr. Vernon, before you came to speak to us. What
a pity that there should be such to-does: but where
there are a large number of people in a family, of
course it can't always be helped. I have always
found gentlemen were more good-natured than ladies
about getting one invitations. If you were to tell
Mrs. Merridew I am here, even if she didn't think
it right to call as most people would, at least she
might send me a ticket. I can't have anything to
do with either side, seeing I only arrived yesterday,
and don't know a word about it: but I do like to
make acquaintance with a place wherever I go."</p>

<p>"I will see that my cousin sends you an invitation,
Miss Ashton, at least if she will do what I ask
her. I have got my work waiting me. Pardon me
if I go on."</p>

<p>"Oh, we are going the same way. I suppose we
are going the same way?" said Emma, looking at
her companion.</p>

<p>"You walk quicker than we do, and I dare say you
are in a hurry," said Hester ungraciously. She did
not respond to the look of mingled reproach and
relief which he gave her. The very vicinity of
Catherine Vernon's house stiffened Hester into
marble, and Edward was very anxious to go on. He
stood still for one moment with his hat in his hand,
then hastened on, at a rate very little like his usual<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_147" id="Page_147">[Pg 147]</a></span>
mode of progression. Hester on her part followed
with studious lingering, pausing to point out to her
companion the view over the Common, the roofs of
the Redborough houses, the White House on the
opposite slope. Emma naturally conceived her own
suspicions from this curious piece of pantomime.
They had been walking smartly before, they walked
slowly now&mdash;and hers was what she thought a
romantic imagination. She felt confident that these
two were true lovers separated by some family
squabble, and that they did not venture to be seen
walking together. "I know we were going the same
way," she said, "because there are not two ways, and
you can see the town before you. I can't see why
we might not have walked together. It is sinful to
carry family tiffs so far," Emma said.</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_148" id="Page_148">[Pg 148]</a></span></p>




<h2><a name="CHAPTER_IX" id="CHAPTER_IX">CHAPTER XXV.</a></h2>

<h3>A DOUBLE MIND.</h3>


<p>Edward had drawn his bow at a venture when he
made that statement about Catherine to Hester, and
he was full of doubt as to how it would influence
her. This was the first time almost that he had disregarded
opinion and withdrawn the bolts and bars
and let himself go. There was something in the
atmosphere of the young house, all breathing of life
and freedom, and daring disregard of all trammels,
which got into his head in spite of himself. He had
abandoned altogether the decorous habits of his life,
the necessity which bound him as surely in a dance
as at his office. On ordinary occasions, wherever
a ball occurred in Redborough, Edward was aware
beforehand which young ladies he would have to
dance with, and knew that he must apportion his
attentions rightly, and neglect nobody whose father
or mother had been civil to him. He knew that he
must not dance too often with one, nor sit out in
corners, nor do anything unbecoming a young man<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_149" id="Page_149">[Pg 149]</a></span>
upon whom the eyes of many were fixed. But the
very air in the house of the Merridews was different
from that of other places. There was a licence in it
which existed nowhere else. He, the staid and grave,
carried off Hester from her partners, appropriated
her for a good part of the evening, sat with her
hidden away among the ferns in the conservatory, and
only resigned her when he was compelled to do so.
Even then, by way of emphasising his choice of
Hester, he scarcely danced at all after, but stood
among the other disengaged men in the doorways,
watching her and seizing every opportunity to gain
her attention. He was startled at himself when he
thought of it. He walked home in the middle of
the night, in the faint wintry moonlight, following
the old fly he heard lumbering off in the distance
carrying her home, his mind filled with a curious
excitement and sense of self-abandonment. He had
always admired her&mdash;her independence, her courage,
her eager intelligence, had furnished him since she
was a child with a sort of ideal. He had kept
wondering what kind of woman she would grow up;
and lo! here she was, a woman grown, drawing
other eyes than his, the object of admiring glances
and complimentary remarks. When he had seen
her in her washed muslin at Catherine Vernon's
parties, she had still appeared to him a child, or
little more than a child. He had still felt the
superiority of his own position, and that the passing
glance and shrug of familiar confidential half-apology
would probably please her more than the ordinary<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_150" id="Page_150">[Pg 150]</a></span>
attentions which he had to show among so many.
But Hester, by Ellen Merridew's side, a taller and
grander woman, well-dressed, with her mother's
pearls about her white throat, which was as white as
they, was a different creature altogether. To risk
everything for a mere school-girl was one thing, but
a stately young creature like this, at whom everybody
looked, of whom everybody said, "<i>That</i> Hester
Vernon? Dear me, I never thought she had grown
up like that!" was a different matter. The sight of
her had intoxicated Edward. Perhaps poor Mrs.
John's pearls and the careful perfection of her dress
had something to do with it. And the place intoxicated
him. There every one was doing what seemed
good in his own sight. There were few or none of
those stern reminders which he had read elsewhere
in the eyes of parents whose daughters were waiting
to be danced with, the "Was-it-for-this-I-asked-you-to-dinner?"
look, to which he had so often succumbed.
For once he had lost his head; he was even vaguely
conscious that he had come there with a sort of
intention of losing his head, and for once thinking of
his own pleasure, and nothing more. No doubt this
had been in his mind: and the sudden sight of that
white figure, all graceful and stately, and of Mrs.
John's pearls, had done the rest. But he was a little
nervous next morning as he thought over what he
had been doing; he did not bear Catherine's questioning
well at breakfast. When she asked him
whom he had danced with, he made answer that he
had danced very little. But yet he had enjoyed<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_151" id="Page_151">[Pg 151]</a></span>
himself, oh yes. It had been so pretty a party that
it had been pleasure enough to look on. He described
the conservatory and its Chinese lanterns with enthusiasm.
"It must, indeed, have been like fairyland&mdash;or
the fireworks at the Crystal Palace," Catherine
had said. And he had felt a bitter pang of offence,
as she laughed. He did not feel, indeed, that he
could bear any remarks of the kind, or depreciation
of Ellen, for whom he felt a special kindness just
now. When Catherine said, "But all this must have
come to a great deal of money: Algernon Merridew
has only a share in his father's business, he has no
private money, has he?&mdash;but, of course I know he
has no private means: and Ellen's little money will
soon go at that rate."</p>

<p>"I don't suppose Chinese lanterns cost very much,"
said Edward.</p>

<p>"Your temper is doubtful this morning," said
Catherine, with a smile. "It is 'on the go,' which
is usual enough after late hours and the excitement
of a dance; but I don't think you are often so much
excited by a dance. Did you see some one whom
you admired, Edward? I am sure, if she is a nice
girl, I shall be very glad."</p>

<p>"Perhaps it would be as well not to try, Aunt
Catherine; we might not agree about what a nice
girl is."</p>

<p>"No?" said Catherine rather wistfully.</p>

<p>She looked into his doubtful eyes across the breakfast
table, and, perhaps for the first time, began to
feel that she was not so very certain as she had once<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_152" id="Page_152">[Pg 152]</a></span>
been as to what her boy meant. Was it possible
after all, that perhaps the words upon which they
agreed had different meanings to each? But this
was only a passing cloud.</p>

<p>"Who was the belle?" she said smiling; "you
can tell me that, at least, if you can't tell who you
admired most."</p>

<p>Edward paused; and then an impulse of audacity
seized him.</p>

<p>"I don't know if you will like it," he said, "but
if I must tell the truth, I think that girl at the
Vernonry&mdash;Hester, you know, who is grown up, it
appears, and <i>out</i>&mdash;"</p>

<p>Catherine bore the little shock with great self-possession,
but she felt it.</p>

<p>"Hester. Why should you suppose I would not
like it? She must be nineteen, and, of course, she is
<i>out</i>. And what of her?" Catherine said, with a
grave smile.</p>

<p>She was vexed that Edward should be the one to
tell her of the girl's success, and she was vexed, too,
that he should think it would displease her. Why
should it displease her? He ought to have kept
silence on the subject, and he ought not to have
seemed to know that she had any feeling upon it:
the suggestion hurt her pride.</p>

<p>"Ellen seems to have taken her up. She has
grown up much handsomer than I should have expected,
and she was very well dressed, with beautiful
pearls&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Ah!" said Catherine, with a long breath; "then<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_153" id="Page_153">[Pg 153]</a></span>
her mother kept her pearls!" She laughed a moment
after, and added, "Of course, she would; what
could I have expected? She kept her settlement.
Poor little thing! I suppose she did not understand
what it meant, and that she was cheating her
husband's creditors."</p>

<p>"I never quite understood," said Edward, "why
you should have brought her here, and given her a
house, when she is still in possession of that income."</p>

<p>"She has only a scrap of it. Poor little thing!
She neither knew it was wrong to take it, nor that if
she did keep it, it ought not to have been allowed to
go for his after debts. She got muddled altogether
among them. The greater part of it she mortgaged
for him, so that there was only a pittance left.
Whatever you may think, you young men, it is a
drawback for a man when he marries a fool. And
so she kept her pearls!" Catherine added, with a
laugh of contempt.</p>

<p>"Marrying a fool, however, must have its advantages,"
said Edward, "since a woman with
brains would probably have given up the settlement
altogether."</p>

<p>"Advantages&mdash;if you think them advantages!"
Catherine said, with a flash of her eyes such as
Edward had seldom seen. "And certainly would
not have kept the pearls&mdash;which are worth a good
deal of money," she added, however, with her habitual
laugh. "I think they must have dazzled you, my
boy, these pearls."</p>

<p>"I am sure they did," said Edward composedly;<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_154" id="Page_154">[Pg 154]</a></span>
"they took away my breath. I have seen her here
often, a dowdy little girl" (he scorned himself for
saying these words, yet he said them, though even
his cheek reddened with the sense of self-contempt)
"with no ornaments at all."</p>

<p>"No," said Catherine; "to do Mrs. John justice,
she had as much sense as that. She would not have
put those pearls on a girl's neck, unless she was
dressed conformably. Oh, she has sense enough for
that. I suppose she had a pretty dress&mdash;white? But
of course it would be white; at the first ball&mdash;and
looked well, you say?"</p>

<p>"Very handsome," said Edward, gravely. He did
not look up to meet the look of awakened alarm,
wonder, doubt, and rousing up of her faculties to
meet a new danger, which was in Catherine's eyes.
He kept his on his plate and ate his breakfast with
great apparent calm, though he knew very well, and
had pleasure in thinking, that he had planted an
arrow in her. "By the way," he said, after an interval,
"where did John Vernon pick his wife up?
I hear she is of good family&mdash;and was it her extravagance
that brought about his ruin? These are
details I have never heard."</p>

<p>"It is not necessary to enter into such old stories,"
said Catherine, somewhat stiffly. "He met her, I
suppose, as young men meet unsuitable people everywhere;
but we must do justice. I don't think she
had any share in the ruin, any more at least than a
woman's legitimate share," she added, with a laugh
that was somewhat grim. "He was fond of every<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_155" id="Page_155">[Pg 155]</a></span>
kind of indulgence, and then speculated to mend
matters. Beware of speculation, Edward. Extravagance
is bad, but speculation is ruin. In the one
case you may have to buy your pleasures very dear,
but in the other there is no pleasure, nothing but
destruction and misery."</p>

<p>"Is not that a little hard, Aunt Catherine? there
is another side to it. Sometimes a colossal fortune
instead of destruction, as you say; and in the meantime
a great deal of excitement and interest, which
are pleasures in their way."</p>

<p>"The pleasure of balancing on the point of a
needle over the bottomless pit," she said. "If I
were not very sure that you have too much sense to
be drawn into anything of the kind, I should take
fright, to hear you say even as much as that. The
very name of speculation is a horror to me."</p>

<p>"Yet there must always be a little of it in business,"
he said, with a smile creeping about the
corners of his mouth.</p>

<p>"You think me old-fashioned in my notions, and
with a woman's incapacity to understand business;
but in my day we managed to do very well without
it," Catherine said.</p>

<p>"To think of a woman's incapacity for business in
your presence would be silly indeed. I hope I am
not such an ass as that," said Edward, looking up at
her with a smile. And she thought his look so kind
and true, so full of affectionate filial admiration and
trust, that Catherine's keen perceptions were of no
more use to her than the foolishness of any mother.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_156" id="Page_156">[Pg 156]</a></span></p>

<p>He returned to luncheon that day as if for the
purpose of obliterating all disagreeable impressions,
and it was on leaving the Grange to return to the
bank that he met Hester and Emma. This confused
and annoyed him for the moment. It was not so
that he would have liked to meet the heroine of last
night; and her unknown companion, and the highly
inappropriate place of meeting, made the encounter
still less to his taste. But when he had hurried on
in advance he began to ask himself what was the
meaning of Hester's reluctance to walk with him,
or even to speak to him, her attitude&mdash;drawing back
even from his greeting, and the clouded look in her
eyes. It was natural that he should not wish to
speak to her at the door of the Grange, but why
she should wish to avoid him he could not tell. It
would have been a triumph over Catherine to have
thus demonstrated her acquaintance with him at
Catherine's very door. So Edward thought, having
only the vulgar conception of feminine enmity. On
the whole, seeing that he had sowed the seeds of
suspicion in Catherine's bosom, it was better that
Hester should hold him at arm's length. Yet he
was piqued by it. When he reached the bank,
however, news awaited him, which turned his
thoughts in a different channel. He found Harry
Vernon and Algernon Merridew in great excitement
in the room which was sacred to the former. Ashton
had made the first <i>coup</i> on their behalf. He had
bought in for them, at a fabulously low price, certain
stock by which in a few weeks he was confident they<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_157" id="Page_157">[Pg 157]</a></span>
might almost double their ventures. To furnish the
details of this operation is beyond the writer's power,
but the three young men understood it, or thought
they understood it. Of course a skilful buyer prowling
about a crowded market with real money in his
pocket, knowing what he wants, and what is profitable,
will be likely to get his money's worth, whether
he is buying potatoes or stock.</p>

<p>"I saw it was very low," said Merridew, "and
wondered at the time if Ashton would be down
upon it. I thought of writing to him, but on the
whole I suppose it's best not to cramp them in their
operations. They ought to know their own business
best."</p>

<p>"They shell it out when there's a good thing going,
these fellows do," said Harry, out of his moustache.</p>

<p>"And nobody has any money apparently," Algernon
said, with a laugh of pleasure, meaning to imply
<i>save you and me</i>. "When money's tight, that is the
time to place a little with advantage," he said with a
profound air. "I think you should go in for it on a
larger scale, you two fellows that have the command
of the bank."</p>

<p>"I wouldn't risk too much at once," Harry said.</p>

<p>Edward listened to their prattle with a contempt
which almost reached the length of passion. To
hear them talk as if they understood, or as if it
mattered what they thought! His own brains were
swelling with excitement. He knew that he could
go a great deal further if he pleased, and that
Harry's share in the decision would be small.<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_158" id="Page_158">[Pg 158]</a></span>
Dancing on the point of a needle over the bottomless
pit! It was like an old woman's insane objection
to anything daring&mdash;anything out of the common
way. Ashton's letter to him was far longer and
more detailed than his communications with the
others. He said plainly that here was an opportunity
for an operation really upon a grand scale,
and that there could be no doubt of a dazzling
success. "You will communicate just as much or
as little of this as you think proper to the others,"
Roland wrote, and it was all that Edward could do
to keep up an appearance of replying to them, of
joining in their gratification as he pondered this
much more important proposal. "It is not once in
a dozen years that such a chance arises," Roland said.</p>

<p>Now Edward had nothing of his own to speak
of, far less than the others, who each had a trifle of
independent fortune. All that he could risk was
the money of the bank. The profit, if profit there
was, would be to the bank, and even that large
increase of profit would have its drawbacks, for
Catherine, who liked to know everything, would
inquire into it, and in her opinion, success would be
scarcely less dangerous than failure. He could not
stop in the drab-coloured calm of the office where
these two young idiots were congratulating each
other, and trying to talk as if they knew all about
it. His scorn of them was unspeakable. If they
gained a hundred pounds their elation would be
boundless. They were like boys sending out a little
toy frigate and enchanted when it reached in safety<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_159" id="Page_159">[Pg 159]</a></span>
the opposite side of the puddle. But Ashton meant
business. It was not for this sort of trifling work
that he had set himself to watch those fluctuations,
which are more delicate than anything in nature
they could be compared to. The blowing of the
winds and their changes were prose compared to
the headlong poetry of the money-market. Edward
felt so many new pulses waking in him, such a
hurrying fever in his veins, that he could not control
himself.</p>

<p>"You'll be here, I suppose, Harry, till closing
time? I'm going out," he said.</p>

<p>"You going out&mdash;you that never have anything
to do out of doors! I had to umpire in a match on
the other side of the Common," said Harry, "but
if you'll just tell Cordwainer as you pass to get
some one else in my place, I don't mind staying.
I'm sure you've done it often, Ned, for me."</p>

<p>"I am not in request, like you; but I have something
I want to see to, to-day."</p>

<p>"All right," said Harry. "Don't you go and
overdo it, whatever it is."</p>

<p>"You are seedy with staying up, dancing and
flirting," said young Merridew, with his imbecile
laugh. "Nelly says she could not believe her eyes."</p>

<p>"I wish Ellen, and you too, would understand
that dancing and flirting are entirely out of my
way," said Edward, with a flush of anger, as he took
his hat and went out.</p>

<p>Poor Algernon's innocent joke was doubly unsuccessful,
for Harry stood perfectly glum, not moving<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_160" id="Page_160">[Pg 160]</a></span>
a muscle. He had not been at all amused by the
proceedings of the previous night.</p>

<p>"I wouldn't report it, if I were you, when Ellen
says silly things," said her brother, as black as a
thunder-cloud.</p>

<p>"By Jove!" said poor Merridew, falling from his
eminence of satisfaction into the ludicrous dismay
of undeserved depreciation. He told his wife after,
"They both set upon me tooth and nail, when I
meant nothing but to be pleasant."</p>

<p>"I wish you would learn, Algernon, that it's always
wise to hold your tongue when I'm not there," Ellen
said. "Of course I understand my own family.
And not much wonder they were vexed! Edward
that doesn't look at a girl because of Aunt Catherine,
and Harry that she has snubbed so! You could
not have chosen a worse subject to be pleasant
upon," Mrs. Ellen said.</p>

<p>But it was not this subject that was in Edward's
mind as he sallied forth with the step and the air
of that correct and blameless man of business which
already all Redborough believed him to be. He had
taken that aspect upon him in the most marvellous
way&mdash;the air of a man whose mind was balanced
like his books, as regularly, and without the variation
of a farthing. He was one of those who are born
punctual, and already his morning appearance was
as a clock to many people on the outskirts of
Redborough. His hat, his gloves, his very umbrella,
were enough to give people confidence.
There was nobody who would have hesitated to<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_161" id="Page_161">[Pg 161]</a></span>
entrust their money to his hands. But if Redborough
could have known, as he passed along the streets,
causing a little wonder to various people&mdash;for
already it had become a surprising fact that Mr.
Edward should leave business at so much earlier an
hour than usual&mdash;what a wild excitement was passing
through Edward's veins, the town would have
been soared out of its composure altogether. He
scarcely felt the pavement under his feet; he
scarcely knew which way he was turning. The
message for Cordwainer went out of his head,
though he went that way on purpose. Several
important questions had come before him to be
settled since he had taken his place at the head
of the bank. He had been called upon to decide
whether here and there an old customer who had
not thriven in the world should be allowed to
borrow, or a new one permitted to overdraw; and
in such cases he had stood upon the security of the
bank with a firmness which was invulnerable, and
listened to no weak voices of pity. But this was
far more important than such questions as these. As
his ideas disentangled themselves, there seemed to be
two possibilities before him. If he threw himself
into Ashton's scheme at all, to do it as a partner
in the business, not indeed with the sanction of
his other partners, but, if there was risk to the firm
in his proceedings at large, to make them profitable
to it in case of success. In case of success! Of
course there would be success. It was inevitable
that they must succeed. On the other side, the<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_162" id="Page_162">[Pg 162]</a></span>
expedient was to use the money and the securities
of the bank, not for the aggrandisement of Vernon's,
but for his own. This would leave the responsibility
of the action entirely upon his own shoulders if
anything went wrong. And he did not refuse to
give a rapid glance at that contingency. What could
it mean to the bank? Not ruin&mdash;he half-smiled
as he thought. It would mean coming down perhaps
in the world, descending from the <i>prestige</i> and importance
of its present rank. And to himself it
would mean going to the dogs&mdash;anyhow, there could
be no doubt on that point. But on the other side!
that was better worth looking at, more worthy of
consideration. It would be like pouring in new
blood to stagnant veins; it would be new life coming
in, new energy, something that would stir the old
fabric through and through, and stimulate its steady-going,
old-fashioned existence. It would be the something
he had longed for&mdash;the liberating influence,
new possibilities, more extended work. He thought,
with an excitement that gradually overmastered
him, of the rush of gain coming in like a river, and
the exhilaration and new force it would bring. This
idea caught him up as a strong wind might have
caught him, and carried him beyond his own control.
He walked faster and faster, skimming along
the road that led into the country, into the quiet,
where no one could note his altered aspect or the
excitement that devoured him, taking off his hat as
he got out of sight of the houses, to let the air blow
upon his forehead and clear his senses. And by and<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_163" id="Page_163">[Pg 163]</a></span>
by things began to become more clear. He read
Ashton's letter over again, and with every word the
way seemed to grow plainer, the risks less. It was
as near a dead certainty as anything could be in
business. "Of course there is always a possibility
that something unforeseen may happen," Ashton
wrote, "and it is for you to weigh this. I think
myself that the chance is so infinitesimal as not to
be worth taking into consideration; but I would not
wish to bias your judgment; the only thing is, that
the decision must be immediate." Now that the
first shock of novelty was over, he felt it in his
power to "weigh this," as Ashton said. Getting
familiarised with the subject made him more impartial,
he said to himself. The first mention of it
had raised a cowardly host of apprehensions and
doubts, but now that the throbbing of excitement
began to die away, he saw the matter as it was&mdash;a
question of calculation, a delicate operation, a
good <i>coup</i>, but all within the legitimate limits of
business. He had recovered, he felt, the use of his
reason, which the novelty, the necessity for immediate
determination, the certainty that he must take
no counsel on the subject, that Harry would be
dumbly obstinate, and Catherine anxiously, hortatively,
immovably against it, had taken away.
Harry was an ass, he said to himself, recovering
his calm, and Aunt Catherine an old woman. What
was the use of the faculties he possessed, and the
position he had gained, if in such a crisis he could
not act boldly and for himself!</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_164" id="Page_164">[Pg 164]</a></span></p>

<p>Thus it was with a very different aspect that
Edward walked back. He put on his hat, feeling
himself cooled and subdued; his pulses returned to
their usual rate of beating, which was essentially a
moderate one. And so rapidly had he skimmed
over the ground, and so quick had been the progress
both of his steps and his thoughts, that when he
got back, with his mind made up, to the skirts of
the Common, he saw the football party just beginning
to assemble, and recollected that he had never
given Harry's message to Cordwainer, and that
accordingly no new umpire could have been found
in Harry's place. But what did that matter? He
reflected benevolently, with a contemptuous good
nature, that he could get back to the bank in time
still to liberate his cousin, so that everybody would
be satisfied. This he did, stopping at the telegraph
office on the way. His despatch was as follows:&mdash;"Proceed,
but with caution. Needful will be forthcoming."
He drew a long breath when he thus
decided his fate; then he returned with all the ease
and relief which naturally comes with a decision.
The thing was done, whether for good or evil&mdash;and
there could be very little doubt that it was for good.
His countenance was cheerful and easy as he returned
to the bank.</p>

<p>"I did not give your message, for my business
did not keep me so long as I expected. Your football
fellows are just collecting. You can get there,
if you make haste, before they begin."</p>

<p>"Oh, thanks, awfully!" said Harry. "I hope you<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_165" id="Page_165">[Pg 165]</a></span>
did not hurry, though I'm glad to go. I hope you
understand I'm always ready to stay, Ned, when
you want the time. Of course, you're worth two
of me here, I know that; but I can't stand anything
that's not fair, and if you want to get
away&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"I don't, old fellow; I've done my business. It did
not take so long as I thought. You had better be off
if you want to get there in time."</p>

<p>"All right," said Harry. And he went off to his
match in a softened state of mind, which, had he
been able to divine it, would have astonished Edward
greatly. Harry had seen Hester and her companion
pass, and he felt a sad conviction that Edward's sudden
business had something to do with that apparition.
Well! he had said to himself, and what then? Hadn't
he a right to try, the same as another? If she liked
one better than the other, should the fellow she
wouldn't have be such a cad as to stand in her way?
This was what had made Harry "fly out," as Algy
said, upon his brother-in-law; it had made him pass
a very sombre hour alone in the bank. But in the
revulsion of feeling at Edward's rapid return, and the
likelihood either that he had not seen Hester, or that
she would have nothing to say to him, Harry's heart
was moved within him. Either his cousin was "in
the same box" as himself and rejected, or else he was
innocent altogether of evil intention&mdash;and in either
case Harry's heart was soft to him: at once as one
whom he had wronged, and as one who might be
suffering with him under a common calamity.</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_166" id="Page_166">[Pg 166]</a></span></p>




<h2><a name="CHAPTER_X" id="CHAPTER_X">CHAPTER XXVI.</a></h2>

<h3>STRAIGHTFORWARD.</h3>


<p>"I hope, Cousin Catherine," said Emma, "that
you will not think it is any want of civility on my
part. I wished very much to come the first day. I
went out with Hester Vernon, who is constantly at
grandpapa's&mdash;and I was quite distressed, when I
found we had to pass here, that she would not bring
me in to call. But she seemed to think you would
rather not. Of course I know that there are often
tiffs in families, so I wouldn't say anything. There
are times when Elinor wouldn't call on William's
wife not if life and death depended on it; so I understand
quite well, and of course a stranger mustn't
interfere. Only I wish you to know that I had no
wish to take sides, and didn't mean to be rude.
That was the last thing in the world I intended.
Elinor has always told us younger ones so much
about you."</p>

<p>"It is very kind of Elinor, I am sure; and you
have behaved most judiciously," said Catherine, with<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_167" id="Page_167">[Pg 167]</a></span>
a twinkle in her eye. "It is unnecessary to say to a
person of your judgment that in the best regulated
family&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Oh, you needn't tell me," said Emma, shaking
her head. "Nobody can know better than I do. It
is very awkward when you are the youngest, and
when you are expected by everybody to take their
part. Of course they have all been very kind to me.
I live part of my time with one, and part with
another, and that is why every one thinks I should
be on their side. But now I am very independent,"
Emma said, "for Roland has taken me. I dare say
he would tell you, Cousin Catherine, when he was
here."</p>

<p>"That must be a very pleasant arrangement," said
Catherine, with a smile. "I suppose when you were
with Elinor you had a good deal to do."</p>

<p>"I do Roland's housekeeping now. I don't wish
to be idle," said Emma. "But to be sure when there
are children to be seen after you are never done, and
especially boys. Elinor has five boys!&mdash;it is something
dreadful! The stockings and the mending you
can't think! It is very nice being with Roland; he
is most kind. He gives me a regular allowance for
my clothes, which I never got before, and I am sure it
is very good of him; but you can't have everything,
you know, and it is a little dull. He is out all day,
and often in the evenings, for of course I shouldn't
wish him to give up his gentlemen-engagements for
me. I don't think people should ever do that sort of
thing. Tom Pinch is all very well in Dickens, but it<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_168" id="Page_168">[Pg 168]</a></span>
would be inconvenient in actual life; for suppose you
married?&mdash;and of course that is what every girl
expects to do."</p>

<p>"To be sure," said Catherine. "Is there anything
of that sort in prospect, if I may be permitted to
ask?"</p>

<p>"Of course, I am quite pleased that you should
ask," said Emma. "It would be such a comfort to
have somebody like you to come and talk it over
with, Cousin Catherine, if there was anything&mdash;for I
should feel sure you could tell me about my trousseau
and all that. But there is nothing, I am sorry to say.
You see I have had so little chance. Elinor took me
out sometimes, but not much, and she was far more
disposed to amuse herself than to introduce me. I
don't think that is nice in a married sister, do you?
and speaking of that, Cousin Catherine, I am sure
you will be kind enough to help me here. Grandpapa
will not take any trouble about it. I asked
the gentleman whom we met coming out of
here, Hester and I&mdash;Mr. Edward I think is his
name."</p>

<p>"What of Edward?" said Catherine quickly, with
a touch of alarm.</p>

<p>"But nothing seems to have come of it," said the
persistent Emma. "He said he would try, and
Hester made a sort of promise; but there has been
one since and I have never been asked. It is your
niece's dance&mdash;Mrs. Merridew, I think, is her name.
She gives one every week, and both for a little
amusement, and that I mayn't lose any chance that<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_169" id="Page_169">[Pg 169]</a></span>
may be going, I should like very much to go. I
don't doubt that you could get me an invitation
in a moment if you would just say you would
like it."</p>

<p>Catherine's consternation was ludicrous to behold.
She was herself so much amused by the situation
that she laughed till the tears stood in her eyes.
But this matter-of-fact young woman who sat by and
gazed upon her with such a stolid incapacity to see
the joke, was of the side of the house to which
Catherine could pardon anything&mdash;the old captain's
grandchild, Roland's sister. What would have been
vulgar assurance in another, was amusing <i>na&iuml;vet&eacute;</i> in
Emma. When she had got over her laugh she said,
with amused remonstrance as if she had been speaking
to a child&mdash;</p>

<p>"But you must know, Emma, that these family
tiffs you are so well accustomed to, come in to
prevent this too. Ellen would not care for my
recommendation. She is a very self-willed little
person, and indeed the chief rebel of the family."</p>

<p>"That is all very well, Cousin Catherine," said
Emma with the downrightness of fact and certainty;
"but you know you are the head of the family. You
have got the money. If they were in trouble they
would all have to come to you: and if you said "I
wish this," of course nobody would venture to refuse
you. The most stupid person must be sure of that."</p>

<p>There was a commanding commonsense in this view
that silenced Catherine. She looked at the young
philosopher almost with awe.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_170" id="Page_170">[Pg 170]</a></span></p>

<p>"Your arguments are unanswerable," she said;
"there is nothing to be said against such admirable
logic."</p>

<p>"Then you will ask for an invitation for me?"
said Emma. "I am sure I am much obliged to you,
Cousin Catherine. It is always best to come to the
fountain-head. And it isn't as if I were going to
cause any expense or trouble, for I have my ball-dress
all ready. I have wore it only once, and it is quite
fresh. It is my second ball-dress; the first I wore
about a dozen times. Elinor gave it me, which was
very kind of her. It was only muslin, but really it
was very nice, and got up quite respectably. But
this one I bought myself out of the allowance Roland
gives me. Don't you think it is very thoughtful of
him? for of course what a sister buys for you, however
kind she is, is never just the same as what you
would choose for yourself."</p>

<p>"I suppose not&mdash;I never had any experience," said
Catherine, gravely. "I am afraid, however, that you
will not meet anybody who will much advance your
views at Redborough. It is an old-fashioned, backward
place. London would afford a much larger
scope for any social operations. Indeed it is very
condescending in a young lady from town to give
any attention to us and our little parties down
here."</p>

<p>"Oh!" said Emma, eager to correct a mistake,
"that just shows how little people in the country
know. You think London means the London you
read of in books, where you meet all the great people<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_171" id="Page_171">[Pg 171]</a></span>
and have half-a-dozen parties every night. But when
London means Kilburn!" said Emma shaking her
head, "where all the gentlemen go to the city every
morning, and there is perhaps one dance given in a
whole season, and only the people asked that you
know! and we know scarcely one. You see the
people there don't think of calling because they are
your neighbours. There are so many: and unless
you get introductions, or work in the parish, or something&mdash; Working
in the parish is a very good way,"
Emma added, with a sudden recollection; "you get
invited to a great many evening parties where you
just stand about and talk, or people sing: and not
many dances. Unfortunately I never was much used
to parish work. In Elinor's there was too much to do,
and Bee was too worldly, and as for William's wife,
though we should not like it to be known, Cousin
Catherine, she is&mdash;a Dissenter."</p>

<p>Emma made this admission with the reluctance it
merited.</p>

<p>"I have not told grandpapa," she said, with bated
breath.</p>

<p>"I think he could bear it," said Catherine. "I
think you might venture on the communication.
In some things he is very strong-minded."</p>

<p>"It was a very bitter pill to us," Emma
said.</p>

<p>Here they were interrupted by the entrance of
the captain himself, who had left his grandchild in a
cowardly way to make Catherine's acquaintance by
herself. But Emma had not minded. She had not even<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_172" id="Page_172">[Pg 172]</a></span>
divined that his pretence of business was hypocritical.
She had not been alarmed by Catherine, and now she
was comfortably confident of having made a good
impression, and secured a friend.</p>

<p>"I am quite ready, grandpapa," she said. "Cousin
Catherine has been so kind. She says she will speak
to Mrs. Merridew about my invitation, so you may
make yourself quite easy on that subject. And grandmamma
will be very pleased. Of course I could not
expect such an old lady as she is to exert herself.
But Cousin Catherine understands how important
that sort of thing is to a girl," Emma said, with an air
of great gravity.</p>

<p>The captain gave Catherine a piteous glance. He
did not understand the new specimen of womankind
of whom he had the responsibility, and Catherine,
whose powers of self-restraint had been called forth
to an unusual degree, responded with an outburst of
laughter.</p>

<p>"We have got on admirably," she said. "I like
a straightforward mind, with such a power of
applying reason to practical uses. You must come
to see me often, Emma. Never mind grandpapa.
He will tell you I am busy, but when I am so, I
shall tell you so. You are far too sensible to take
offence."</p>

<p>"Oh, offence, Cousin Catherine? between you
and me!" said Emma, "that would be too ridiculous.
I hope I know my place. When you are the youngest
you soon learn that. Your first lesson is that nobody
wants you, and that you must just do the best you<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_173" id="Page_173">[Pg 173]</a></span>
can for yourself. There is only just one thing I
should like to mention, and that is, that the first
time it would be a great advantage to me if you
would take me. It is such a fine thing for a girl
when she is known to belong to the best people in a
place. It is not even as if my name were Vernon.
But people will say 'Miss Ashton! who is Miss
Ashton? I never heard of her!' Whereas if I were
with you, the best partners in the place would ask
to get introduced to me, and that would give me
a start. Afterwards I could get on by myself, as I
hear Mrs. Merridew does not care for chaperons,"
Emma said.</p>

<p>Once more Catherine was struck dumb. She
pushed her chair back a little and regarded this
dauntless young woman with a mixture of dismay,
admiration, and amusement.</p>

<p>"But I assure you I have never gone to any of
Ellen's junketings," she said.</p>

<p>"That will not matter," said the persistent Emma,
"Of course she will be pleased to have you. It will
be a great honour. And then to me it would be such
an advantage. I should feel that I really was having
my chance."</p>

<p>When she left the gate of the Grange, walking by
the side of the bewildered captain, Emma felt that
she was tolerably sure of getting all she wanted, and
her triumph, though quite moderate and serious, was
great.</p>

<p>"I am very glad you left me to make acquaintance
with Cousin Catherine by myself," she said, "grandpapa;<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_174" id="Page_174">[Pg 174]</a></span>
I was a little frightened, but she was so nice.
She was very nice to Roland too; and it will be such
an advantage to go into society for the first time
with such a well-known person. It makes all the
difference. People see at once who you are, and
there is no difficulty afterwards."</p>

<p>"And you think Catherine Vernon will depart
from all her habits and take you to that butterfly's
ball?" the captain said.</p>

<p>"Of course, grandpapa," said Emma, in the calm
of simple conviction. It was not a matter which
admitted of any doubt.</p>

<p>And the wonderful thing was, that she proved
right. To her own great amazement, and to the
consternation of everybody concerned, Catherine
Vernon assumed her grey gown, the gayest of her
evening garments, and most befitting a dance, and
took Emma Ashton in her own carriage to Mrs.
Merridew's house on the hill. Catherine was too
genial a person in ordinary society to exercise any
discouraging influence upon the young party in
general; but upon the members of her own family
there was no doubt that she did have a subduing
effect. Ellen's face of consternation was the subject
of remark in the family for years after; indeed, they
spoke of "the night when Aunt Catherine came to
the dance," dating things from it, as people speak
of a great national event. Harry was the one who
showed himself most equal to the occasion. He
established himself by Catherine's side as a sort of
guard of honour, relieving the frightened Algernon,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_175" id="Page_175">[Pg 175]</a></span>
who, what with pride and pleasure on his own part,
and a wondering sympathy with Ellen's dismay, did
not know how to conduct himself in such an emergency.
Edward did not appear at all. He had said
he was very busy, and did not think it was possible
he could go, as soon as he heard of Emma's extraordinary
request. And though Catherine was almost
displeased by his defection, there was nothing to be
said against so evident a necessity as that the most
active partner in the bank should attend to his work.
Her chief point of curiosity in the scene which she
surveyed with amused disapproval and astonishment
to find herself there, was Hester, to whom her eyes
turned with the lively sense of opposition which
existed always between the two.</p>

<p>Catherine's eyes, in spite of herself, turned from
Emma's insignificance to the fine indignant figure
of the girl whom (she said to herself) she could not
endure, with the most curious mixture of curiosity,
and interest, and rivalship. She, Catherine Vernon,
the rival of a trifling creature of nineteen! Such
a sentiment sometimes embitters the feelings of a
mother towards the girl of whom her son makes
choice. But Catherine's mood had nothing to do
with Edward. It was more like the "taking sides,"
which Emma was so anxious to demonstrate was
impossible to her as a stranger. Hester had no
separate standing ground, no might or authority,
and yet it was no exaggeration to say that Catherine,
with all of these advantages, instinctively looked
upon her as a rival power.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_176" id="Page_176">[Pg 176]</a></span></p>

<p>Hester was in the blue dress, which was the
alternative of her white one. In those days there
were no yellows or sage greens; and even before
Catherine remarked the girl's young freshness and
beauty, or the high-thrown head, and indignant
bearing, which denoted on Hester's side a sense
of Catherine's inspection, her eyes had caught the
glistening pearls on the young neck&mdash;her mother's
pearls. Catherine looked at them with a mingled
sense of pity and disdain. If that mother had been
such a woman as Catherine, neither these pearls nor
anything else of value would have remained in her
hands. They were Catherine's, they were the
creditors' by rights. Mrs. John was not wise
enough to understand all that; but Hester, if she
knew, would understand. Catherine could not keep
her mind from dwelling upon these ornaments. If
Hester knew, what would the girl do? Pocket the
shame and continue to wear them as became Mrs.
John's daughter, or tear them from her neck and
trample them under foot? One or the other she
would have to do&mdash;but then, Hester did not know.</p>

<p>As she walked about through the rooms, stopping
to give a gracious word there, a nod here, a question
about father or mother, Catherine's mind was not
occupied either with the house or the company, but
with this girl. Hester had been in the background
till now. A glimpse of her in the corner of her own
drawing-room, standing by her mother's side in her
washed muslin, did not&mdash;though Hester's look was
always one of indignation&mdash;impress her relation's<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_177" id="Page_177">[Pg 177]</a></span>
mind. But here she stood like an equal, sending
glances of defiance out of her brown eyes. Hester
had come in the old fly with the white horse, while
Emma was fetched from her grandfather's by Catherine's
carriage. The contrast was striking enough;
but Catherine, though she would not own it to
herself, was more aware than any one else, that
no one would look twice at Emma while Hester
was by.</p>

<p>When the evening was about half over, Emma
came to her patroness and kindly gave her her
dismissal.</p>

<p>"Don't wait longer on my account, Cousin Catherine,"
she said. "I am quite nicely started; thank
you so much. I have got my card filled; quite the
nicest people in the room have asked me. I'm sure
I am very grateful to you, for it is all your doing;
but don't think of waiting for me. Chaperons
are not at all wanted, and I can go home in Hester's
fly. I am so much obliged to you, but of course
you want to get to bed. Don't stay a moment
longer than you wish, for me."</p>

<p>Catherine smiled, but did not take any further
notice. She walked about the rooms for some time
after on the arm of Harry, who was always dutiful.</p>

<p>"And who do you think is the prettiest person
in the room, Harry? I excuse you from telling
me it is my young lady, whom for my own part I
don't admire."</p>

<p>"I cannot see there is any doubt about it, Aunt
Catherine," said Harry, in his sturdy way. "It is<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_178" id="Page_178">[Pg 178]</a></span>
my cousin Hester. There is an air about her&mdash;I
cannot explain it: I found it out long ago; but now
everybody sees it."</p>

<p>"Thanks to her mother's pearls," said Catherine,
with her laugh.</p>

<p>Harry looked at her with startled eyes.</p>

<p>"The pearls are very pretty on her; but they are
nothing, to me at least," he said.</p>

<p>"You should not let her wear them. She should
not have them; knowing her father's story, as I
suppose you do.&mdash;Don't you see," cried Catherine,
with sudden energy, "that she ought not to appear
in Redborough in those pearls?"</p>

<p>Emma had been standing near when this conversation
began, and she drew closer to listen, not with
any clandestine intention, but only with a natural
curiosity. She caught up the words in a disjointed
way. What reason could there be for not wearing
your mother's pearls? She would have gone and
asked the question direct of Catherine, but that just
then her partner came for her; and for the rest of
the evening she had no time to consider any such
question; nor was it till she found herself in the fly
in the middle of the night rumbling and jolting
along the dark road that skirted the Common, by
Hester's side, that this mysterious speech occurred
to her mind. She had been talking of the advantage
of being introduced by a well-known person and
thus put at once "on a right footing."</p>

<p>"You don't want that. You know everybody;
you have been here all your life," she said. "And<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_179" id="Page_179">[Pg 179]</a></span>
I am sure you got plenty of partners, and looked
very nice. And what a pretty necklace that is,"
said Emma, artlessly entering upon her subject.
"Are they real? Oh, you must not be offended
with me, for I never had any nice ornaments. The
youngest never has any chance. If they are real,
I suppose they are worth a great deal of money;
and you must be quite rich, or you would not be
able to afford them."</p>

<p>"We are not rich; indeed we are very poor," said
Hester, "but the pearls are my mother's. She got
them when she was young, from her mother. They
have belonged to us for numbers of years."</p>

<p>"I wonder what Cousin Catherine could mean!"
said Emma innocently.</p>

<p>"About my pearls?" cried Hester, pricking up
her ears, and all her spirit awakening, though she
was so sleepy and tired of the long night.</p>

<p>"She said you oughtn't to wear them. She
said you shouldn't have them. I wonder what she
meant! And Mr. Harry Vernon, that tall gentleman,
he seemed to understand, for he got quite red
and angry."</p>

<p>"I oughtn't to wear them&mdash;I shouldn't have
them!" Hester repeated, in a blaze of wrath. She
sat bolt upright, though she had been lying back in
her corner indisposed for talk.</p>

<p>"Oh, I dare say she didn't mean anything," said
Emma, "only spite, as you are on the other side."</p>

<p>Hester did not reply, but she was roused out of all
her sleepiness in a moment. She let Emma prattle<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_180" id="Page_180">[Pg 180]</a></span>
on by her side without response. As they drove past
the Grange a window was opened softly, and some
one seemed to look out.</p>

<p>"Oh, I wonder if that was Mr. Edward," said
Emma. "I wonder why he stayed away. Is he
after some girl, and doesn't want Cousin Catherine
to know? If it were not that you would scarcely
speak to each other when you met, I should say it
was you, Hester."</p>

<p>"I wish," said Hester severely, "that you would
go to sleep; at three in the morning I never want
to talk."</p>

<p>"Well, of course, it may be that," said Emma
somewhat inconsequently, "but I never want to
sleep when I have been enjoying myself. I want
to have some one in the same room and to talk it
all over&mdash;everything that has happened. Who was
that man, do you know who&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>And here she went into details which Hester,
roused and angry, paid no attention to. But Emma
was not dependent on replies. She went on asking
questions, of which her companion took no notice,
till the fly suddenly stopped with a great jarring and
rattling, and the opening of two doors, and glimmers
of two small lights in the profound dark, gave note
of watchers in the two houses, warned by the slow
rumbling of the ancient vehicle, and glad to be
released from their respective vigils. In Hester's
case it was her mother, wrapped in a warm dressing-gown,
with a shawl over her head, and two anxious
eyes shining out with warm reflections over her<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_181" id="Page_181">[Pg 181]</a></span>
little candle, who received the girl in her finery with
eager questions if she were very cold, if she were
tired, if all had gone off well.</p>

<p>"Run up stairs, my darling, while I fasten the
door," Mrs. John said. "There is a nice fire and
you can warm yourself&mdash;and some tea."</p>

<p>In those days people, especially women, were not
afraid of being kept awake because of a cup of tea.</p>

<p>"Mamma," said Hester when her mother followed
her up stairs into the old-fashioned, low-roofed
room, which the fire filled with rosy light, "it
appears that Catherine Vernon says I ought not to
wear your pearls. Has she anything to do with
your pearls? Has she any right to interfere?"</p>

<p>"My pearls!" cried Mrs. John almost with a
scream. "What could Catherine Vernon have to
do with them? I think, dear, you must have fallen
asleep and been dreaming. Where have you seen
Catherine Vernon, Hester? She gives us our house,
dear; you know we are so far indebted to her: but
that is the only right she can have to interfere."</p>

<p>"Had she anything to do with my father?"
Hester asked.</p>

<p>She was relieved from she did not know what
indefinable terrors by the genuine astonishment in
her mother's face.</p>

<p>"Anything to do with him? Of course; she had
a great deal to do with him. She was his first
cousin. Her father had brought him up. It was
intended&mdash;&mdash;but then he met me," said the gentle
little woman, not without a tone of satisfaction in<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_182" id="Page_182">[Pg 182]</a></span>
the incoherent tale. "And she was a kind of
partner, and had a great deal to do with the bank.
I never understood the rights of it, Hester. I never
had any head for business. Wait, darling, till I
undo these buttons. And now, my love, if you have
got warm, go to bed. My pearls! She must mean,
I suppose, that they are too good for you to wear
because we are poor. They were my mother's, and
her mother's before that. I would like to know
what Catherine Vernon could have to say to them,"
Mrs. John said, taking the pearls from her child's
throat and holding them up, all warm and shining,
to the light, before she deposited them in their
carefully padded bed.</p>

<p>If there was anything in the world that was her
individual property, and in which no one else had
any share, it was her pearls: they had always been
one of her household gods.</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_183" id="Page_183">[Pg 183]</a></span></p>




<h2><a name="CHAPTER_XI" id="CHAPTER_XI">CHAPTER XXVII.</a></h2>

<h3>A CENTRE OF LIFE.</h3>


<p>There are periods in life, and especially in the
early part of it, when all existence gets, as it
were, out of focus, and instead of some great and
worthy centre, takes to circling round some point of
outwardly frivolous meaning, some little axis of
society entirely unfit to be the turning-point of even
the smallest world of human concerns. This had
come to be the case with the Vernons in those
lingering weeks of winter just before Christmas.
That the young, gay, foolish&mdash;nay, absurd&mdash;house
on the hill inhabited by Algernon Merridew and his
wife should become to all of this important family
the chief place, not only in Redborough, but for
a time, in the world, was the most curious fact
imaginable; but yet it was so. To Edward it was
the one place in the world where he was, as he
hoped, free from observation and able to do as he
pleased; which meant&mdash;where he was entirely free
from Catherine, and need have no fear of any interruption<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_184" id="Page_184">[Pg 184]</a></span>
from her to his amusement, or his pleasure,
or, if you like it better, his love: to Hester it was
the place where she had been recognised as part
possessor in her own person, like the others, of the
honours due to her family, and where the homage,
to which a young woman sufficiently endowed has a
right, was first given to her; if it had a more close
attraction still as the place where she met Edward,
that was a dream as yet unacknowledged to her own
heart. Harry, on the other hand, had a double
interest&mdash;neither of them of a very cheerful kind&mdash;one
of which was the necessity of standing by his
sister, who his good sense told him was embarked in
a very perilous way, and whose husband was quite
incapable of controlling or guiding her erratic course;
and the other was the painful fascination of watching
Edward and Hester through all the vicissitudes
of their quarrellings and makings up&mdash;the hours
they would spend together, followed by other hours
in which they would mutually scowl at each other
and did not speak. Harry knew, poor fellow, by a
sort of instinct common to the rejected, that the
quarrels were as ominous, or more so, than the
intimacy. Hester had never quarrelled with himself,
they had been on the best terms, alas, as they
were now! But Edward she would pass with
flushed cheek and shining eye: she would address
him with haughty reluctance when it was necessary
to speak to him, and mark her reluctance with a
decision which was never employed towards those
for whom she cared nothing. Harry's eyes were<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_185" id="Page_185">[Pg 185]</a></span>
opened, and he understood the duel between them.
The only mistake he made was in the belief that it
had gone further than the preliminary stage. He
could not believe it possible that no explanation had
taken place between them.</p>

<p>And of all people to be interested in Ellen's silly
parties, who should be seized with an intense desire
to know all about them but Catherine Vernon herself?
She did know more about them than any one
else who was not present, and than a great many
who were present. Her suspicions had been roused
by various indications of something occult in
Edward's mind. He was no longer on his guard to
the incredible extent which had been common with
him; his mind was agitated with new hopes and
fears&mdash;the chance of being able to be altogether
independent of Catherine had made him relax in his
caution, and there had been moments when, in all
the stir and elation of his new life, he had been on
the eve of disclosing everything. Habitual prudence
had saved him, but yet there had been something
in his aspect which had roused Catherine's suspicions.
They had been, as she thought, in such
entire sympathy before, that she was deeply
affected by this feeling, which she could not explain
to herself&mdash;this sense of being in sympathy no
longer. And it was all since Ellen's absurd parties
began, and he began to meet at them, <i>that</i> girl, born
for the confusion of all her plans, Catherine thought.
There were evenings when the strongest temptation
to order her carriage instead of going to bed, and to<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_186" id="Page_186">[Pg 186]</a></span>
go suddenly&mdash;unexpected&mdash;to Ellen's party, and see
with her own eyes what was going on, would come over
her mind. But there was in Catherine's mind, along
with her suspicions, that terror to have them confirmed,
which so often goes with love when it begins
to tremble in this way. Had she gone, Edward
would have declared contemptuously (within himself)
that it was all of a piece with her usual watchfulness,
and the perfection of her system&mdash;not being able to
divine that Catherine would have given the world to
find herself in the wrong, and shrank from proving
herself to be in the right. In the meantime she was
kept informed of what was going on more or less by
various people, and above all by Emma Ashton,
whose information, though largely leavened by a
great deal about herself which did not much interest
her hearer, also afforded revelations about other
people, especially Hester. Emma had become a
constant visitor at the Grange. She was allowed to
prattle for hours, and Catherine was always kind to
her. Her insignificance, her little egotisms, her
straightforward aim at her own advancement, did not
call forth the amused contempt of that observer of
the human comedy as they would have done in any
other specimen. Catherine's tradition in favour of
her mother's kindred covered this little person with
a shield. But those who were not aware of this fond
superstition wondered and scorned. And the feeling
of the Redborough community was not in Emma's
favour.</p>

<p>"She is just a horrid little spy," Ellen cried.<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_187" id="Page_187">[Pg 187]</a></span>
"I know she goes and tells Aunt Catherine everything.
I shouldn't have her if I could help it; but
everybody knows now that she is Aunt Catherine's
relation, and they are all civil to her."</p>

<p>"She cannot do us any harm, Nelly," said her
husband, "we are not afraid of any spy, I hope."</p>

<p>"Oh, don't talk so much nonsense, Algy," cried
Ellen. "Of course she can't do us any harm; but
I hate spies for all that."</p>

<p>They were wrong so far that Emma was not at all
a spy. Of all the interminable discourses she poured
out upon Catherine, the far greater part was about
herself; only unfortunately the part that interested
her auditor was not that about herself, but the
much smaller portion in which, quite unconscious
and without any evil motive, she dropped here and
there a chance hint as to the others.</p>

<p>"And whom did you say Edward was dancing
with?" Catherine would say.</p>

<p>"Oh, I was not talking of Mr. Edward, but of
young Mr. Merridew, who is always very attentive.
That was our third dance together, and I did feel it
was a great pity there were no chaperons, because I
should have asked her, if I had been with any one,
whether it wasn't rather, you know&mdash;for I
wouldn't for the world do anything to get myself
talked about."</p>

<p>"I thought you had been talking about Edward,"
Catherine said.</p>

<p>"Oh dear no. It was whether three dances
together wasn't perhaps a little&mdash;&mdash; for I always feel<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_188" id="Page_188">[Pg 188]</a></span>
the responsibility of belonging to the family, Cousin
Catherine, and I wouldn't for the world do anything&mdash;&mdash;it
is quite different with gentlemen. Mr.
Edward was just carrying on as usual."</p>

<p>"But, Emma, you must tell me what you mean
by 'carrying on.'"</p>

<p>"Oh, I don't mean any harm," Emma would say.
"I wonder what young Mr. Merridew is&mdash;if he is
well off, and all that? Hester has cousins all round
to tell her what's best, and of course she does not
need to be on her p's and q's, like me."</p>

<p>Catherine had to follow a mazy, vague, and
wandering clue thus, through acres of indifferent
matter, and to piece together broken scraps of
information which were never intended to affect her
at all. But they did affect her sometimes so powerfully
that she had her hand actually on the bell, not
only that evening but on several other occasions, to
intimate that she should want the carriage at ten
o'clock&mdash;a proceeding which would have convulsed
the household at home, and carried consternation to
the recipients of the unlooked-for honour. But, on
further consideration, Catherine always succeeded in
subduing herself, often sadly enough saying to herself
that it would be time enough when he told her&mdash;Why
should she go out to meet trouble? Her heart
so took her strength from her, and changed her
natural temperament, that Catherine restrained
herself, with a shrinking, which nobody who knew
her would have believed in, from any contact with
irresistible fact, and decided that rather than find<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_189" id="Page_189">[Pg 189]</a></span>
out the vanity of her confidence it was better to
be deceived.</p>

<p>Thus the house on the hill which flaunted forth
every Thursday evening the great lamps of its lighted
windows and the lines of Chinese lanterns in the
conservatory, became the centre for the moment of
a great deal of life and many anxious thoughts. It
turned Ellen's head with pride and delight when she
received indications of this, which indeed came to
her on all sides. When a shade of alarm crossed
Algernon's face at the amount of the bills, she took
a lofty position which no man pretending to any spirit
could have gone against. "Goodness, Algy, how
can you look so glum about a pound or two, when
you see we are doing a great work?" Ellen said.
"Well! if it is not more important than mothers'
meetings, I don't know what words mean: and
Mr. Ransom says the mothers' meetings are a great
work." Algernon laughed, but he, too, felt a thrill
of pride. To have made the house, which though
it was Ellen's was a Merridew house, and his own,
into a centre for the great Vernon family, was, if not
a great work, at least an extraordinary local success,
such as old Merridew's son could never have hoped
to attain to. And indeed Algernon's remonstrances
about the bills were of the feeblest description. He
was too much devoted to his wife to have interfered
with her, even had not the balance of moral force
been on her side; and he was proud of the extravagance
and the commotion and the way in which the
elders shook their heads. It is pleasant to make a<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_190" id="Page_190">[Pg 190]</a></span>
sensation, and Algernon was comforted by the knowledge
that he had already made a little money by
his stockbroking transactions, and hoped to make a
great deal more.</p>

<p>The young men had carried on their transactions
with considerable vigour, though with little risk so far
as Algernon and Harry were concerned. But Edward's
was a different case. The venture upon which he
had pondered with so much anxiety had turned out
favourably, and he had gone on without telling his
secret to any one, with a general amount of success
which had made the operation of risking other
people's money seem quite natural to him&mdash;a process
without any practical consequences at all, except the
accumulation of a good deal of money under his
own name, which is one of the happiest of sensations.
To his temperament indeed it is by no means
certain that the vicissitudes of the career in which
he had embarked, the tragic suspense in which he
was occasionally held, and the transport of deliverance
that followed, were not in themselves the highest
pleasures of which he was capable. And even so
early in his career as this, such crises would come.
He had self-command enough not to betray himself
when these moments arrived, and though there were
eyes keen enough to see that something had produced
a change in him, they were, as has been seen
in Catherine's case, deceived as to the cause of his
perturbation. Hester did not have so many opportunities
of studying him, and she had no clue to the
business complications in which he was involved;<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_191" id="Page_191">[Pg 191]</a></span>
but she had many thoughts on her own mind as to
the reason of all the commotion which she saw
vaguely, without understanding it. Some of the
members of the general society, strangers who sometimes
perceive a departure from habit which does
not strike the most intimate, had said of Edward
on more than one occasion, that he must be in love.
Was he in love? Hester had felt that a look was
directed to herself when this was said, and that a
suppressed laugh had run round the little group.
She was herself agitated by tumults which she could
not understand, commotions in which Edward was
certainly involved, and his name thus mentioned
brought the blood to her cheek. Was he in love?
She did not want to turn the question upon herself,
to bring the matter to any conclusion, one way or
another. He was very pale that evening, yet would
flush, as she herself did, growing red in a moment
and then pale again; and there was a watchful air
about him as of a man who expected to hear something
or see some one whom nobody else looked for.
A man who was in love did not behave so. He was
absorbed in the being whom he loved. He is not
absorbed in me, the girl said to herself involuntarily,
then blushed, as if her thought had been found out.
Edward came up to her at this moment, which made
her confusion the greater.</p>

<p>"Why do you change colour so? What is the
matter?" he said to her.</p>

<p>"It is you who are changing colour," said Hester,
not knowing how else to defend herself.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_192" id="Page_192">[Pg 192]</a></span></p>

<p>Instead of contradicting her, or throwing off the
accusation, he suddenly took her hand and drew it
through his arm.</p>

<p>"It is true," he said. "I have something on my
mind. You were going to dance this waltz with
me. Come into the hall, it is cool there, and let
us talk instead?"</p>

<p>Every inch of available space in the house was
given up to the accommodation of the guests, and
the hall was filled, like the conservatory, with plants,
among which little groups of two could find corners.
Edward established Hester in one of these, and
placed a chair for himself, so as to cut her off
from everybody.</p>

<p>"You are the only one that can understand," he
said. "I can speak to you. Don't mind me if I
look like a fool. I am too anxious to talk."</p>

<p>"What is it?" she said, with a tremour of sympathetic
anxiety.</p>

<p>"It is only business," he said, "but it is business
so unexpected that even beside you I am obliged to
think of it. Can a man say more than that?" he
asked with something in his eyes which Hester had
never seen there so distinctly before, and which
silenced her. One great emotion clears the way for
another. Edward in the commotion of his being was
almost ready to rush into words that, being said,
would have turned his life upside down, and shattered
all his present foundations. He was saved by
an incident which was of the most ordinary commonplace
kind. There came a violent ring at the door<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_193" id="Page_193">[Pg 193]</a></span>
which was within half a dozen steps of the spot
where they sat. Half a dozen heads immediately
protruded from among the little banks of foliage to
see what this odd interruption could mean, for all the
guests had arrived, and it was not late enough for
any one to go away. Hester saw that all the colour
ebbed immediately out of Edward's face. He did not
even attempt to say a word to her, but sat perfectly
still, slightly turned towards the door, but not looking
out, awaiting whatever might come. It seemed to
Hester that never in her life had she so understood
the power of fate, the moment when Nature and life
seem to stand still before some event. A minute
after, the footman came up and handed a telegram to
Edward. He tore it open with trembling hands. The
next moment he jumped up from his seat with a
suppressed cry of triumph. "Hurrah!" he said, and
then with a laugh which was very unsteady held out
the despatch to her. All that it contained were the
words "All right." But somehow it was not to these
words that Hester's eyes confined themselves. "From
Ashton, London&mdash;&mdash;" she said without knowing that
she did so, before he thrust the pink paper into his
pocket. "Come along," he said, "the waltz is not
half over. We shall be in time yet." And for the rest
of the evening Edward was in wild spirits, dancing
every dance. He even asked the girls to take him
with them in their fly as far as the Grange in his
reckless exhilaration, and as he got out in the darkness,
Hester felt a kiss upon her hand. This startled<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_194" id="Page_194">[Pg 194]</a></span>
her still more than the telegram. "Till to-morrow,"
he said as they rumbled away.</p>

<p>"What does he mean by till to-morrow? He must be
coming to make you an offer to-morrow&mdash;that is how
they do. It often happens after a dance&mdash;when it is
going to happen," Emma said in the darkness, with a
little sigh.</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_195" id="Page_195">[Pg 195]</a></span></p>




<h2><a name="CHAPTER_XII" id="CHAPTER_XII">CHAPTER XXVIII.</a></h2>

<h3>WAS IT LOVE?</h3>


<p>Was he in love? That this was a question very
interesting to Hester there can be no reason to conceal.
She did not even conceal it from herself, nor
did she trifle with herself by pretending to suppose
that if he were in love it could be with any one else.
There was no one else who had ever appeared to
attract him. To nobody had he so much as given his
passing attention. When he had neglected her at the
Grange it had been truly, as he said, for no higher
reason than that he might hand down the old ladies
to supper or tea. No young one had ever been
suggested as having any attraction for him. Hester
did her best to enter calmly into this question. It is
one which it is sometimes very difficult for a young
woman to decide upon. What is conspicuous and
apparent to others will often remain to her a question
full of doubt and uncertainty; and it is to be feared
that when this is the case it is all the more likely that
her own sentiments will be capable of very little<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_196" id="Page_196">[Pg 196]</a></span>
question. This, however, was not exactly the case
with Hester. Her mind was very much interested, and
indeed excited. She wanted to know what Edward
meant. From the first morning when he had met her,
a child wandering on the Common, his manner had
been different to her from the manner of other people,
or from his own manner to others. His eyes had
lingered upon her with pleasure even when his look
had been stealthy; even when it had been but a glance
in passing, they had said things to her which no other
eyes said. His interest in her had never failed. It
had not leaped like Harry's, after a good deal of
indifference, into a sudden outburst. The very charm
and attraction of it had lain in the restraint which
Hester had often considered to be dishonest, and
against which she had chafed. She had known all
through, even in those evenings when he had neglected
her, that he was always conscious what she was
doing, and knew without looking when any one went
to talk to her, when she left the room and when she
came back. This had kept her own interest in him
unvarying. But Hester was not any more sure of
her own sentiments than of his. She remembered
with some shame that Roland Ashton's presence had
made a great difference in the state of her mind as
regarded Edward. She had felt but little curiosity
about him when that stranger was at the Vernonry.
All the foreground of her mind had been so pleasantly
occupied by that new figure which was in itself much
more attractive than Edward, that he had slid almost
completely out of her thoughts. And this fact, which<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_197" id="Page_197">[Pg 197]</a></span>
was only quite apparent to her after Roland was
gone, had greatly discomfited Hester, and given her
a very small opinion of herself. Was it possible that
any new object that might appear would have the
same effect upon her? The effect had passed away
and Edward had come slowly back to his original
position as the person who in all Redborough interested
her most. But the incident had been of a very
disturbing character, and had altogether confused
her ideas. Therefore the question was one of a very
special interest. To know exactly how he regarded
her would much help her in deciding the other question,
not less important, which was, how she regarded
him? Everything thus depended, Hester felt, on
Edward's sentiments. If it should turn out that he
loved her&mdash;strange thought which made her heart
beat!&mdash;it could not be but that in great and
tender gratitude for such a gift she should love him.
She did feel offended by his efforts to disguise his
feelings, or even to get the better of them&mdash;never at
least when she was cool and in command of her
judgment; but there could be no doubt that she
was very curious and anxious to know.</p>

<p>Was he in love? The appearances which had made
the lookers-on say so were not altogether to be attributed
to this, Hester knew. His paleness, his excitement,
his absence of mind, had all been from another
cause. The discovery had startled her much, and
given her an uneasy sense that she might at other
times have referred to some cause connected with
herself manifestations of feeling which had nothing<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_198" id="Page_198">[Pg 198]</a></span>
to do with her, which belonged to an entirely different
order of sentiments&mdash;a thought which made her blush
red with shame, since there is nothing that hurts a
girl's pride so much as the suggestion, that she has
been vain, and imagined, like the foolish women, a
man to love her who perhaps has never thought of
her at all. But the question altogether was one which
was too profound for Hester. She could not tell
what to make of it. Among the heads of the young
party at the Merridews, she was aware that no doubt
was entertained on the matter. Edward was allotted
to her by a sort of unspoken right, and in Ellen's jibes
and Harry's gloom she read alike the same distinct
understanding. Ellen in her chatter, notwithstanding
the warning to her cousin at the beginning, accepted
it entirely as a matter of course: and in a hundred
things that Edward had said as well as in his looks,
which were still more eloquent, there had been strong
confirmation of the general belief. But yet&mdash;Hester
could not make up her mind that it was beyond
doubt. She watched him, not with anxiety so much
as with a great curiosity. If it was not so, would
she be deeply disappointed? she asked herself without
being able even to answer that question. And
as to her own sentiments, they were quite as perplexing.
She was half ashamed to feel that they
depended upon his. Was this a confession of feminine
inferiority? she sometimes wondered with a hot
blush&mdash;the position here being very perplexing
indeed and profoundly difficult to elucidate; for it
neither consisted with the girl's dignity to give her<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_199" id="Page_199">[Pg 199]</a></span>
love unsought, nor thus to wait as if ready to deliver
up her affections to the first bidder.</p>

<p>Such a matter of thought, involving the greatest
interests of life, is curiously mixed up with its most
frivolous events. They met in the midst of the
dancing with a constant crash and accompaniment of
dance-music, amid chatterings and laughter, and all
the inane nothings of a ball-room, and yet in the
midst of this were to consider and decide the most
important question of their lives. It was only thus,
except by concerted meetings which would have
solved the question, that they could meet at all, and
the grotesque incongruity of such surroundings with
the matter in the foreground, sometimes affected
Hester with a sort of moral sickness and disgust.
The scene seemed to throw a certain unworthiness,
levity, unelevated aspect upon the question altogether&mdash;as
if this thing which was to affect two lives was
no more than an engagement for a dance.</p>

<p>And though it is a strange thing to say, it is
doubtful whether Edward was much more decided
in his sentiments than Hester was. In such a case
the man at least generally knows more or less what
he wants; but partly because Edward's mind was in
a high state of excitement on other subjects, he too
was for a moment entirely uncertain as to what his
wishes were. He knew with sufficient distinctness
that he could not tolerate the idea of her appropriation
by any one else, and it was his full intention
that some time or other Hester should be his, and
no one else's, which gave a foundation of certainty<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_200" id="Page_200">[Pg 200]</a></span>
to his thoughts which was wanting to hers. But
further than this, he too was in a chaos somewhat
similar to that of Hester. Sometimes there was in
his mind the strongest impulse to tell her that he
loved her, and to settle the matter by an engagement,
which must, however, he felt, be a secret one,
giving satisfaction to themselves but no one else.
And here it may be remarked that whereas Hester
was apt to be seized by sudden fits of shame at the
idea that perhaps, after all her thoughts on the
subject, he was not thinking of her at all, Edward
on the other hand felt no such alarm, and never
thought it even presumptuous on his part to assume
the certainty of her love for him, which, as the
reader knows, was a certainty to which she had not
herself attained. He believed with simplicity that
when, if ever (nay, certainly it was to happen some
time), he declared himself, Hester would respond
at once. He acknowledged to himself that it was
possible that in pique, or impatience, or weariness,
if he did not keep a vigilant watch over the situation,
it might happen that Hester would accept
some one else. Her mother might drive her to
it, or the impossibility of going on longer might
drive her to it; but he had so much confidence in
the simplicity of her nature that he did not believe
that the complications which held him in on every
side could affect her, and was sure that in her heart
the question was solved in the most primitive way.</p>

<p>This was and generally is the great difference
between the man and woman in such a controversy;<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_201" id="Page_201">[Pg 201]</a></span>
until he had spoken, it was a shame to her that she
should ask herself did he intend to speak; but
Edward felt no shame if ever the idea crossed his
mind that he might be mistaken in supposing she
loved him; such a discovery would have made him
furious. He would have aimed all sorts of ill names,
such as coquette and jilt, at her; but he had no
fear of any such mistake. He felt sure that he had
her in his power, and when he did declare himself
would be received with enthusiasm; and he always
meant to declare himself some time, to reward her
long suspense, and to make her the happiest of
women. In words, this part is generally allotted to
the lady, as it was in the days of chivalry. But the
nineteenth century has modified many things, and if
ever (out of America) it was really the woman who
occupied the more commanding position, it is no
longer so in the apprehension of the world. Only
in this particular case, as has been seen, Edward was
wrong. It is possible enough that in the curious
position of affairs between them she would have
followed his lead whatever it might be; but even
this was by no means certain, and as a matter of
fact, though her curiosity about him drew her mind
after him, she had not even gone so far as he had,
nor come to any ultimate certainty on the case
at all.</p>

<p>Emma Ashton, who by means of propinquity&mdash;that
quick knitter of bonds&mdash;had become Hester's
frequent companion, had very different ideas on a
similar subject. There was no sort of indefiniteness<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_202" id="Page_202">[Pg 202]</a></span>
in her views. She was perfectly clear as to what
she was likely to do in a given case, and the case in
question occupied probably almost as great a share
in her thoughts as the different yet similar question
which agitated the mind of Hester. It was indeed
to outward view, though with so many and subtle
differences, a very similar question. Emma's
wonder was whether Reginald Merridew would
"speak" before she went away. She had no doubt
that all the requisite sentiments were existing, and
she had satisfied herself that when he did "speak"
there was no reason why she should not reply
favourably. The family was "quite respectable,"
it might almost be said also that it was "quite
well off," but that there were rumours that Algernon
was to be "made an eldest son of," which were
somewhat disquieting. The suggestion was one
which made Emma indignant, notwithstanding the
gratitude she owed Algernon and his wife for giving
her "her chance" in Redborough.</p>

<p>"When there is an estate I suppose it is all right,"
Emma said; "anyhow it can't be helped when that's
the case; and there must be an eldest son. But
when your property is in money it does seem such a
mistake to make a difference between your children.
Don't you think so? Oh, but I do; they are just one
as good as another, and why should one be rich and
another poor? If old Mr. Merridew does anything
of this sort I am sure I shall always think it is
very unfair."</p>

<p>"I suppose Mr. Merridew has a right to do what<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_203" id="Page_203">[Pg 203]</a></span>
he pleases?" said Hester; "and as it does not matter
to us&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"You speak a great deal too fast," said Emma,
offended. "Say it doesn't matter to you: but it
may to me a great deal, and therefore I take a
great interest in it. Do you think parents have a
right to do what they please? If they make us
come into the world, whether we wish it or not, of
course they are bound to do their best for us. I am
the youngest myself, and I hope I know my place;
but then there was no money at all among us. Papa
spent it all himself; so certainly we had share and
share alike, for there was nothing. When that's
the case nobody can have a word to say. But the
Merridews have a good deal, and every one ought to
have his just share. Not but what I like Algernon
Merridew very much. He is always very agreeable,
and I think it very nice both of Ellen and him that
they should have been so kind to me and given me
my chance, though you say we're no relations. I
am sure I always thought we were relations, for
my part."</p>

<p>"Did you think Reginald was your relation too?"</p>

<p>"Well, not perhaps quite so far as that&mdash;a connection
I should have said; but it does not matter very
much now," Emma said, with a little simper of
satisfaction. "What a good thing Roland found out
about grandpapa and grandmamma, Hester&mdash;and how
fortunate that they should have asked <i>me</i>! If everything
goes right I shall feel that I owe the happiness
of my life to it. When a girl goes out upon a visit,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_204" id="Page_204">[Pg 204]</a></span>
she never knows what may happen before she gets
home&mdash;or even she may never need to go home at
all. I don't know if I shall, I am sure. To talk
about anything taking place from Roland's house
would be absurd. Why, we don't even know the
clergyman! and nobody cares a bit about us. If there
was any meaning in home it should be from Elinor's,
you know&mdash;for everybody knows us there."</p>

<p>"What do you mean about 'anything taking
place'?&mdash;and from&mdash;from what?" Hester asked, who
never paid too much attention to Emma's monologues,
and had altogether lost the thread of her
discoursings now.</p>

<p>"Oh," cried Emma, clasping Hester's arm close,
"how you do make one blush! Of course you know
very well what I mean. If he speaks before I go
away&mdash;and I am sure I hope he will, for it would be
such a nuisance to have him following me up to
Kilburn!&mdash;I don't suppose there would be any
occasion for waiting long. Why should people
wait when they are well off enough, and nothing
to be gained by it? When the man has not
got settled in a proper situation, or when there
is not enough to live upon, then of course they
must put it off; but in such a case as ours&mdash;I
mean this, you know&mdash;it might as well be here
as anywhere," Emma said, reflectively. "Cousin
Catherine has always been very kind to me. Rather
than let grandpapa and grandmamma be disturbed
at their age, I shouldn't wonder if she would give
the breakfast&mdash;especially considering the double<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_205" id="Page_205">[Pg 205]</a></span>
connection, and that it is such a very good thing to
get me settled. You needn't laugh, Hester. It is
not a thing to laugh at. Unless I had settled, what
should I have done? You are an only daughter,
you don't know what it is to be the youngest and
have no proper home."</p>

<p>These words mollified Hester, who had been in
lofty opposition, half disgusted, half indignant. She
was brought down by this appeal to her sympathy.
"But you are happy with your brother?" she said.</p>

<p>"Oh, yes&mdash;happy enough; Roland is very kind.
And though it's a small house, it is tolerably nice,
and two maids with nothing particular to do. But
it is very dull, you know, and I don't know many
people. And you must always take into consideration
that at any moment Roland might marry, and
then where should I be? Why, he admires you
very much. He might just as likely as not, next
time he comes, make you an offer; and then where
should I be?"</p>

<p>"You think, I suppose," said Hester, loftily, "that
when a man makes an offer, as you say, that is all
about it; there is no opposition to be looked for on
the girl's side?"</p>

<p>"Well, you know," said Emma, "I call you one of
the high-flown ones. There are always some like that.
But in an ordinary way what do girls want but their
chance? And when they've got it, what folly to
refuse&mdash;at least in my position, Hester. If I don't
get settled, what have I to look forward to? Roland
will marry sooner or later. He's an awful flirt, and<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_206" id="Page_206">[Pg 206]</a></span>
though he admires you very much, I shouldn't advise
you to have anything to do with him unless you just
marry him out and out. I should think he'd make
a good husband. But don't be engaged to him,
Hester; mind my words. Be married in three weeks,
or have nothing to say to him&mdash;that is my advice.
Oh, you need not be huffy. I am sure I don't want
you or any one to marry him, at least till I am
settled. But if I don't settle now, he is sure, of
course, to marry some time; and then where shall I
be? This is what makes me wish that if&mdash;<i>he</i>, you
know, is going to speak, he would do it, and not
shilly-shally. It is astonishing how men shilly-shally.
I think they take a pleasure in it. They would
know better if they had to wait as we have, and
wonder, and feel that we can't make any arrangements
or settle anything till we know what's coming.
If I have to go away and he never says anything, I
don't know what I shall do."</p>

<p>"Is this because you&mdash;care so much for Reginald
Merridew?" Hester could not so form her lips as to
say love.</p>

<p>Emma made a sort of reflective pause. "I like
him well enough," she said. "I am not one to go
on about love and so forth. Besides, that sort of
thing is not becoming in a girl. You can't, till you
are quite certain what <i>they</i> mean, don't you know?
It is dreadful to go caring for them, and all that, and
then to find out that they don't care for you. A girl
has to wait till they speak."</p>

<p>Hester listened not with her usual mixture of<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_207" id="Page_207">[Pg 207]</a></span>
amusement and indignation, but with a curious feeling
of shame and alarm growing in her. Was not
this what she herself was doing? Emma's desire
that her supposed lover should speak and settle the
question, was it not much the same thing as her own
curiosity and self-questioning in respect to Edward?
Emma was always more practical. She was so in
sentimental matters as well as in everything else.
Things that other people leave indistinct, in a half
light, she put clearly, without any pretences at
obscurity. Her grieved sense of the shilly-shallying
of men, her consciousness of all the inconveniences
that arose from their way of putting off their explanations,
her prudential conviction that a girl should
not commit herself by "caring for" <i>them</i>, before
they made it apparent that they cared for her&mdash;were
these not so many vulgar, straightforward statements
of the dilemma in which Hester too found herself?
But this grotesque resemblance of sentiment and
situation made Hester, as may be supposed, passionately
angry and indignant, not with Emma, who
was guiltless, and who pursued the subject endlessly,
never tiring of it, nor of going over the matter again
and again from the beginning as they walked, but
with herself and Edward, and fate, which had placed
her in such circumstances. It was something like a
caricature of herself that was thus presented to her,
and she could scarcely help laughing at it, even while
she resented it warmly as an insult offered to her
by&mdash;whom? not Emma&mdash;by circumstances and
evil fortune, and the spite of a position which was<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_208" id="Page_208">[Pg 208]</a></span>
intolerable, and Catherine Vernon. All these persons
were conspiring against her, but none of them were
so hard upon Hester as this little purring deliberate
Emma, holding up her little distorted mirror that
Hester in her pride might see how like was the image
in it to her own troubled face.</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_209" id="Page_209">[Pg 209]</a></span></p>




<h2><a name="CHAPTER_XIII" id="CHAPTER_XIII">CHAPTER XXIX.</a></h2>

<h3>CHRISTMAS.</h3>


<p>While all these agitations were going on, it came
to be Christmas, with the usual stir and commotion
always produced in a large family and connections,
by that often troublesome festival. The amount of
reality in the rejoicings may be very doubtful, but
yet there must be a family gathering, and the
different branches of the race must seem to take
kindly to it whatever may be their private sentiments.
Dickens did wisely in finding his types of
Christmas felicity among people to whom an accidental
turkey is a benediction from heaven, and the
mystery of the pudding has not lost its freshness.
In such a family as the Vernons, the turkey and
the pudding are unsatisfactory symbols&mdash;a return
to the rude elements of plenty which were employed
by a more primitive age; and though it certainly
was an excitement for the Miss Vernon-Ridgways,
and Mr. Mildmay Vernon and Mrs. John, to be invited
to dinner, it was by no means invariable that<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_210" id="Page_210">[Pg 210]</a></span>
their feast improved the harmony of these much
separated divisions of the family. It was a very big
dinner, and there was no absolute breach of the
peace. Catherine sat at the head of the table in
a dress which, though very handsome, was by no
means one of her best, and without the diamonds in
which she appeared on very great occasions. This
was kindly intended, in order that she might not
make too evident the contrast between her own
toilette and that of some of her visitors; but the
kindness of the intention was not appreciated.</p>

<p>"We are not considered worth dressing for," Miss
Matilda said, in her sister's ear, after they had respectively
kissed their relative, and, with effusion,
wished her a merry Christmas.</p>

<p>"She thinks it better taste to be as shabby as we
are," said the other, which indeed was very true,
though no offence was meant.</p>

<p>As for Mrs. John, though she was quite willing to
enjoy herself, her mind was kept in a state of nervous
anxiety about Hester, who was in the defiant
mood with which she always met her cousin. It had
been her mother's desire to dress her plainly in one
of the simple dresses made up on the foundation of
the "silk slip," which by this time had been worn
out as a ball-dress. These economies were very
necessary, and indeed it ought to be said that the
ball-dresses could not have been kept up as they
were, but for the sacrifice of Mrs. John's Indian
shawl, which, after Hester and the pearls, was the
thing in the world which the poor lady held most dear.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_211" id="Page_211">[Pg 211]</a></span></p>

<p>Hester had not resisted the substitution of the
simpler dress for those carefully preserved clouds of
tarlatan which were sacred to the Dancing Teas.
But she stood firm to the pearls, and insisted on
wearing them. "Unless you will put them on
yourself, mamma," she said.</p>

<p>"I wear them, Hester! Oh, no! They have
been in their box all these years, and I have never
put them on, you know. I kept them for you. But
don't you think, dear, that just for a family dinner&mdash;no
one is expected to be fine at a family dinner&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Don't you want Catherine Vernon to see them,
mother? If it is so, tell me at once."</p>

<p>"Don't I want Catherine Vernon&mdash;to see them?"
cried Mrs. John, stupefied with astonishment. "I
wonder," she added, regretfully, "what there is
between you that makes you lose your good sense,
Hester&mdash;for you are very sensible in most things,
and far cleverer than I ever was&mdash;the moment
Catherine Vernon's name is mentioned? I cannot
think what it can be."</p>

<p>"Oh, mother! You are too good&mdash;if that is what
not being clever means. When I think how you
have been allowed to stand in the corner of that
room, and nobody taking any notice of you."</p>

<p>"My dear," said Mrs. John, mildly, "I did not
require to go unless I liked."</p>

<p>"And now this dinner&mdash;a sort of Christmas dole
for her relations&mdash;like the flannel petticoats to the
poor women."</p>

<p>"We do not require to go unless we like," said<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_212" id="Page_212">[Pg 212]</a></span>
Mrs. John; "but if you will reflect a little, Hester,
that is not how a lady should talk."</p>

<p>It was seldom that the mild little woman said so
much. When Hester came up to Catherine, following
her mother's little figure, clothed in a black silk
gown which had seen a great deal of service, she
read, with an excitement that made her glow, that
Catherine's first glance was upon the pearls.</p>

<p>"You are quite fine," she said as she went through
the Christmas formula, and dropped a formal kiss
upon Hester's reluctant cheek; "you have put on
your lovely pearls to do us honour."</p>

<p>"She is fond of the pearls," said Mrs. John, who
was very watchful to prevent any collision; "they
were her grandmother's, and her great-grandmother's,
Catherine. It is not only for their value that one
is fond of things like these."</p>

<p>"Their value is sometimes the worst thing about
them," said Catherine, feeling that there was a sternness
of virtue in what she said which justified her
dislike. But Mrs. John stood her ground.</p>

<p>"I don't think so," she said simply. "I like them to
be worth a great deal, for they are all she will have."</p>

<p>Hester, thus talked over, stood drawing back, in
all her flush of youthful indignation, kept down
by the necessities of the occasion. She gave a
glance round at the little audience which was enjoying
the encounter, the Miss Vernon-Ridgways in
the foreground. She caught their keen inquisitive
stare, and the mantling of delight upon their faces
as they witnessed the little passage of arms; and<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_213" id="Page_213">[Pg 213]</a></span>
Mr. Vernon Mildmay craning over their shoulders
with his sharp face projected to see what it was, and
Mrs. Reginald's countenance half sympathetic, half-preoccupied
(for to-day for the first time her eldest
boy had accompanied her, and she was very anxious
lest he should do or say anything that might injure
him with Catherine). But the one thing Hester did
not catch was Edward's eyes, which surely, if he had
cared for her, ought now to have been raised in
kindness. He was outside of the circle, his head
turned away, taking no notice. When Mrs. John
fell back to give way to Ellen Merridew, who came
up rustling and jingling with all her bracelets,
Edward still kept apart. He was talking to Harry,
to Algernon, to everybody except the two who,
Hester felt, wanted the succour of a chivalrous sympathy.
But Mrs. John had no feeling of this kind.
She felt that she had held her own. She looked
with a mild pride upon the group of her neighbours
all so eagerly watching for mischief. It was natural,
when you think of it, that she should treat the
ill-nature of the Miss Vernon-Ridgways with gentle
disdain. Poor things! they had neither a daughter
nor a necklace of pearls. And as she had not been
at the <i>Th&eacute;s dansantes</i>, nor seen Edward in any aspect
but that he had always borne at the Grange, she
felt no anxiety as to his present behaviour. Harry's
was the eye which she sought. She beamed with
smiles when he came and stood beside her. Harry
was always faithful, whoever might be careless. She
looked at him and at Hester with a little sigh; but<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_214" id="Page_214">[Pg 214]</a></span>
who could tell what might happen with patience
and time?</p>

<p>There was, however, one moment during the
evening in which Edward had the opportunity of
setting himself right. It was while the departures
were going on, while the ladies were being shawled
and cloaked. Catherine had not come down stairs,
and in the darkness of the further corner of the
hall, under cover of the chatter of Ellen and Emma
Ashton, the young man ventured upon a hurried
whisper&mdash;</p>

<p>"Do you despise me or detest me most?" he said
in Hester's ear. She started&mdash;what with the sudden
proximity, what with the unexpected character of
the question.</p>

<p>"I wonder?" she answered coldly. He took the
opportunity of wrapping her cloak round her to grasp
both her hands in a sudden, almost fierce grasp.</p>

<p>"You could do nothing less: but I cannot be
different here. Suspicion produces treachery, don't
you know?" he said, with his face close to her ear.
"I cannot be true here. No, don't say anything.
I ought, but I cannot. It is in the air. All of us,
every one except you, we are making believe and
finding each other out, yet going on all the same.
But it is only for a time," Edward cried, grasping
her hands once more till the pressure was painful,
"only for a time!"</p>

<p>Next moment he was standing at the door, impassible,
saying good-night to every one, paying no
more heed to Hester than if she had been, as indeed<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_215" id="Page_215">[Pg 215]</a></span>
she was, the least important of all the Christmas
visitors. Ellen, as a married woman and a social
power, commanded his attention, and to Emma, as
the stranger among so many who knew each other,
he was very polite. But Hester got from him the
coolest good-night. The very servants who stood
about, felt a passing wonder that the prettiest person
in the company should meet with such scant observation,
but explained it by saying to each other that
"Mr. Edward, he was the one as kep' hold of the
main chance."</p>

<p>And Hester went home, angry, yet somewhat
soothed. It did not make her less indignant, less
wrathful; but it gave an excuse which at least had
to be taken into consideration. Before she got
home, indeed, she taught herself to lay that offence
too to the score of Catherine. She went home
packed into the fly with her mother and Emma and
the Miss Vernon-Ridgways, all together. Mr. Mildmay
Vernon was mounted on the box, and the old white
horse had the six people, besides his driver, to drag
behind him. He took a great deal of time over the
short bit of road, thinking probably that it was as
well to take his time over one fare as to put it in
the power of his oppressors to send him out with
another, or perhaps compel him to kick his heels
at the railway station waiting for the last train.
The ladies were packed very close inside, but not
too close to talk. The sisters immediately plunged
into that "criticism of life" which could scarcely be
called poetry, in their hands.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_216" id="Page_216">[Pg 216]</a></span></p>

<p>"What a blessing it is," said one, "that we can't
be called upon to eat another Christmas dinner with
Catherine for another year."</p>

<p>"Dear Catherine!" said the other, "she always
means so well. It is our own fault if we don't
carry out her intentions."</p>

<p>"Indeed," said Mrs. John, "she gave us a very
nice dinner, and everything was very comfortable."</p>

<p>"Dear Mrs. John! you are always so charitable,"
said Miss Matilda, "as we all ought to be, I am
sure. Did you ever see anything so insufferable
as that little Ellen&mdash;like a picture out of a fashion-book&mdash;giving
herself as many airs as if she were
at the head of society? I never heard she had
any society, except the vulgar young people on
the Thursdays. I wonder she doesn't ask her shop
people."</p>

<p>"Oh, hush, hush!" cried Mrs. John, alarmed.</p>

<p>"Perhaps she does ask the shop people," said Miss
Matilda, "it would be wise of her, for I should not
think they'd ever see the colour of their money.
The old Merridews can never keep up all that extravagance,
and Algy is nothing more than a clerk
in his father's office. It is dreadful to see a young
man dragged on to destruction like that."</p>

<p>"Oh, I hope it is not so bad!" cried Mrs. John.
"I am sure if I thought so, I should never let&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"It is the talk of the town," said Miss Matilda.
"A thing must be very bad before it comes to us,
who never hear any gossip."</p>

<p>"Oh, everybody knows," said Miss Martha.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_217" id="Page_217">[Pg 217]</a></span></p>

<p>It was happy that Hester's mind was so fully
occupied, and that the conversation passed harmlessly
over her head. When they reached the
Vernonry, Mr. Mildmay Vernon got down from the
box where he had been seated wrapped up from
head to foot, but which he protested against with a
continuous volley of short coughs as he helped the
ladies out one after another. He thought in his
heart that if one of these strong young women had
been put up on the box, who had no rheumatism,
it would have been more appropriate.</p>

<p>"I hope you have enjoyed your evening, including
your dinner," he said. "I have made up my mind
to rheumatism to-morrow; but what does that
matter in comparison with such a delightful entertainment?"</p>

<p>"It was very nice," said Mrs. John, dubious as to
his meaning, as she always was.</p>

<p>"Nice!" he said, with a grimace, "a sort of little
heaven on earth!"</p>

<p>"It is wicked to be so satirical," said one sister,
with a laugh; and "Dear Catherine! I am sure she
meant everything that was kind," said the other.</p>

<p>And then there was a little flutter of good-nights,
the respective doors opening, and lights flashing out
into the dark.</p>

<p>This entertainment was followed very shortly after
by the larger gathering which Catherine had announced
her intention of giving some time before,
and to which all Redborough was convoked besides
the immediate family. The period between these<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_218" id="Page_218">[Pg 218]</a></span>
two parties was the climax of Hester's hostility to
Catherine Vernon. She had never been so actively
indignant, so angry, nor so impotent against her old
and wealthy cousin as in these wintry days. Catherine
was a kind of impersonation of injustice and unkindness
to Hester. She felt not only that she herself
was oppressed and injured, but that the persecution
of which she was the object was of a kind which
was most petty and miserable, degrading to the
author of it as well as to its victim. The attempt
at interference with her movements was not only a
kind of meddling most irritating to a high-spirited
girl, but it was also the kind of assault which her
very pride prevented her from resisting openly.
Hester felt that she would have lowered her own
pride, and wounded her own self-respect, had she
uttered a word of reply or taken any notice of the
small and petty attack upon her. The incident of
the pearls, though so trifling, excited her almost as
much as the other and more important grievance she
had against Catherine. That Edward should be so
cowed by this woman that he had to conceal his
real sentiments, to offend the girl whom he loved,
to compromise his own honour and dignity all
because of Catherine's watch upon him, and the
subjection in which it held him, was such a miserable
thought to Hester, that it was all she could do
to restrain herself at all. It is terrible to be compelled
to endure one who has harmed those who are
dear to you; but to enter her house and preserve a
show of peace and good-feeling, though you are<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_219" id="Page_219">[Pg 219]</a></span>
aware she is causing the self-debasement of those
you love, that is the hardest of all. What should
it matter to Edward that Catherine's eye was upon
him? An honourable and fine spirit would not
have been influenced by any such oppression. It
made Hester's heart sick to think that he did this
consciously, deceived his benefactress, and pretended
to obey her when in his heart he loathed his
bondage; and to think that she herself should be
called upon to sustain this humiliation filled her
with shame and rage. But though her heart was
bitter against Edward, there was yet a softening in
it, an involuntary indulgence, which made her glad
to elude the question so far as he was concerned, and
to fix upon Catherine, who was the cause of it, with
all her force of indignation.</p>

<p>From Hester's point of view there was indeed
little to be said for this woman, who, to so many in
the place, was the very impersonation of active
benevolence and goodness&mdash;a tyrant who seized
upon the very soul of the young man whom she
favoured most, and whose prying and vigilant observation
forced him to deception, and made him
true to himself only when he was out of her sight&mdash;a
woman, who while she gave with one hand
closed a grasp of iron upon the people obliged to
her with the other, and would prescribe their very
dress if she could. Oh, how true it must be after
all, the picture of the tyrannical, narrow despot,
exacting, remorseless, descending to the lowest
details, which a woman, when endued with<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_220" id="Page_220">[Pg 220]</a></span>
irresponsible power, was understood to make! Hester
had rebelled as a girl does against every such injurious
picture of women; but it occurred to her
now that it must all be true. No doubt it was
unsafe to trust such a creature with any kind of
authority. She would not be content with less than
absolute sway. She would let no charity nor ruth,
nor the hearts of others, nor their wishes, stand in
her way. She would crush a young life with no
more compunction than a savage. Thus Hester
took refuge from questions more trying&mdash;from the
aspect of Edward which within these last few days
had become more and more important to her. Her
whole being seemed to be flowing towards him with
a current which she felt herself unable to restrain.
She did not any longer ask herself questions about
his love. She tried not to ask any questions about
him at all. In her secret consciousness there was a
distrust of him, and disapproval and fear, which had
never been breathed into any ear&mdash;scarcely even into
her own. Indeed, Hester was her own only confidant.
All the things which occupied her were uncommunicable.
She had grown a woman, everything that
happened was now more important to her than in
earlier days. And now there had come a crisis in
her fate, and it was not she who held the key of the
problem, nor her lover, nor any legitimate authority&mdash;but
Catherine! Catherine controlled her future
and all its issues through him. Catherine could have
stopped all further development for both, she could
have checked their love ruthlessly, and made an end<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_221" id="Page_221">[Pg 221]</a></span>
of their happiness. The girl began to feel that there
was something in the presence of this woman, in her
influence, in her very name, that was insupportable.
That impulse of flight which always presents itself to
the impatient spirit came upon her strongly. Why
should not she and her mother shake themselves free
from the imbroglio&mdash;go away anywhere, it did not
matter where, and get peace, at least, and a life free
of agitations and complications? Away from the
Vernons she would be free to work as she pleased,
and so make up for the aid that Catherine gave&mdash;away
from them there would be no more question of
love and hate, love afraid to declare itself, hate
veiled beneath the aspect of benevolence.</p>

<p>Hester had very little to do at home. She had
not even books to read. She had unbounded time to
think; even her visits to her old friends, the captain
and his wife, had grown less frequent since Emma
came, for Emma's monologues were not amusing to
Hester's excited mind, and the captain and Mrs.
Morgan had both yielded to their granddaughter's
irrepressible talent of speech. Hester was more at
home in consequence, more alone, less subject to
wholesome distractions and interruptions. She would
think and think the whole evening through. The
<i>Th&eacute;s dansantes</i> began to fill her with a sort of sickening,
of weariness, and disgust. She felt as if she too,
like Emma, had gone to get her "chance" there, and
was, like Emma, hung up in degrading suspense until
he should speak. The rage with her position, the scorn
of herself with which this filled her, is indescribable.<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_222" id="Page_222">[Pg 222]</a></span>
She would burst forth into wild laughter after one of
Emma's calculations, often repeated, about Reginald
Merridew; then hide her face in her hands to conceal
the burning blush&mdash;the bitter consciousness
that her own circumstances were not much different.
The self-ridicule was more painful still than the
self-disgust. She shed no tears over the question,
but the laughter was a great deal more bitter than
any tears.</p>

<p>Mrs. John was as unconscious of this struggle as if
it had gone on in Kamschatka and not under her
own eye, in her own parlour, and the bedroom that
opened into hers. She was not one of the women
who divine. She understood what was told her, and
not always that&mdash;never anything more than was told
her. She thought her child was not looking well,
but then, she had a cold; and there is nothing more
oppressive than a cold. The first thing that really
startled her was Hester's determination not to go to
Mrs. Merridew's party on the first Thursday that
occurred after Christmas, which was to be a particularly
brilliant one. This struck her mother with
consternation.</p>

<p>"Do you think your cold is so bad as that? I
would not wish you to do anything imprudent, but I
have often heard girls say that a ball was the very
best thing for a cold. If you were to nurse up this
evening, and have your breakfast in bed, I can't help
thinking you would feel quite yourself to-morrow,
my darling," Mrs. John said.</p>

<p>"It is not my cold," said Hester; and then she<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_223" id="Page_223">[Pg 223]</a></span>
reflected that it was a pity to throw aside so excellent
a plea. "At least it is not altogether my
cold."</p>

<p>"Oh, I know how oppressed one feels, just good
for nothing; but, my love, you would feel sorry after.
It is a pity to give in. You shall have a foot-bath
to-night with some mustard in it, and a hot drink.
And you must not get up till mid-day. You'll feel
a great deal better after that."</p>

<p>"I don't want to go&mdash;I am tired of them," Hester
said, her impatience getting the better of her, "once
a week is a great deal too often. I am sick of the
very name of dancing."</p>

<p>"My love!" cried her mother in consternation.
Then she came behind her and gave her a soft little
kiss. "I think I shall give you quinine, for I am
sure you're low," she said, "and you must be bright
and well, and looking your best for Catherine's great
party, which is next week."</p>

<p>"I don't&mdash;&mdash;" cried Hester, then stopped short,
for she had not the heart to give her mother a
double wound by declaring she would not go to
Catherine's party. One such blow was enough
at a time.</p>

<p>The astonishment with which her non-appearance
at Mrs. Merridew's was regarded by all the connection
was unbounded. The discovery that Hester <i>was
not going</i>, filled the Miss Ridgways with excitement.
What could be the cause?</p>

<p>"I suppose there has been a quarrel," the sisters
said. "Ellen is a little minx; but still she is a true<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_224" id="Page_224">[Pg 224]</a></span>
Vernon, and won't stand any such airs as that girl
gives herself. Her mother and she are insupportable,
with their pearls and their pretences."</p>

<p>"Roman pearls," said Mr. Mildmay Vernon, "and
Brummagem pretences."</p>

<p>So they discussed the question. When Hester
went in next day to Captain Morgan's, not without a
little curiosity to hear from Emma what had been
said of her absence: "I am glad you have recovered,"
Mrs. Morgan said, kissing her, and looking into her
face with an air of reproach and a shake of the head.</p>

<p>"It is not like you to give in for a cold," the old
captain added; but fortunately for Hester all explanation
on her part, and all remonstrance on theirs,
was cut short by the persevering deliberate voice
which now was the principal circumstance in the old
people's house.</p>

<p>"I assure you Ellen was very much astonished,
Hester. She looked at me as if she could not
believe her eyes. And they all looked at me as if it
was my fault. How could it be my fault? I didn't
give you your cold. I think there were more people
than usual. We had Sir Roger de Coverley, you
know, because it was Christmas. I danced it with
young Mr. Norris, who has just come into his fortune,
you know. He is very nice. He asked me for four
dances, but I only gave him three. Don't you think
I was right, grandmamma? That is the worst of
Ellen's parties, that there are no old chaperons with
experience, that could advise you on a point like
that. Two waltzes and then the Sir Roger, which is<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_225" id="Page_225">[Pg 225]</a></span>
a sort of extra you know, and doesn't count. I
don't think there could be anything wrong in
that."</p>

<p>"You should not give in, Hester," said the old
captain. "That is not like you. What is a cold at
your age! You should always stand to your colours,
and hold your&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Oh, I said to everybody, Hester had such a bad
cold," said Emma. "I said that her nose was red
and that it quite affected her voice. So it does.
You don't notice it so much when she flames up like
that. I wonder how you can blush in that way,
Hester. It is the difference of complexion, I suppose.
I always keep the same. It is nice in some
ways, for however hot it is you can be sure you are
not a figure; but in other respects I should like to
change colour like that. It makes you look interesting.
People think you are so sensitive, and that
sort of thing, when it's only just complexion. Harry
Vernon was more grumphy than ever because you
were not there, always standing about beside Ellen
and looking after her, which, considering she's
married, is a great deal more than any brother ought
to take upon him. I am sure if Roland did, I should
not know what to think. But then Ellen is an only
sister, which makes a great difference, and I am the
youngest. Reginald Merridew was in such a way!
I was engaged for almost every dance before he
came. I quite enjoyed it. I filled up my card as
soon as I could, just to give him a lesson. Men
should be kept in their proper places. I never<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_226" id="Page_226">[Pg 226]</a></span>
thought you showed half a spirit letting Edward
Vernon carry you off just as he pleased."</p>

<p>"My dear," said old Mrs. Morgan, making an
endeavour to strike in, we have not seen half so
much of you lately as we like to do. My old man
misses you on his walk. Do go and take a walk
with him, as your cold is better."</p>

<p>"Oh, don't send her away when I just want to
talk over everything," said Emma. "You never
think what young people like. I am sure you are
very kind and nice, grandmamma, I always say so.
Whatever any one may think, I always maintain
that you have been very nice and kind to me: and
kept me such a time&mdash;when I dare say you are tired
of me. But you don't remember what young people
like. Of course Hester wants to hear who was there,
and how every one was looking, and who danced
with who, and all that. There are always a hundred
things that we have to say to each other. Come up
with me to my room, Hester, and then we sha'n't
bore grandmamma and grandpapa. I have such a
lot to tell you. Ellen had such a lovely new dress,
old gold and black. It sounds much too old for her,
but it wasn't a bit. It was quite a change among all
the whites and pinks. I just went in my grenadine.
I don't pretend to cope with the rich girls, you know.
If the men want to dance with rich dresses they
must just leave me alone. I am always straightforward.
I say, 'Don't ask me unless you are sure you
don't mind.' But I suppose they like my dancing
or something, for I always have my card full. Sir<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_227" id="Page_227">[Pg 227]</a></span>
Roger de Coverley was really fun. We were all
dancing, it seemed about a mile going down the
middle. It is such a pity you weren't there. Edward
Vernon danced it with&mdash;I really forget who he
danced it with&mdash;one of the Miss Bradleys or Mary
Wargrave, or one of that set. Are you really going
out with grandpapa? That is awfully self-denying of
you, to please the old gentleman. And it is so cold.
Grandmamma, I do think you shouldn't let her go."</p>

<p>"She can hear your report another time&mdash;indeed
she has heard a great deal of it already," said old
Mrs. Morgan. "You don't lose any time, Emma.
But, Hester, if you are afraid&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Oh, I shouldn't go on any account," cried Emma,
"with a bad cold. But then I have such dreadful
colds when I do have them. I am obliged to go to
bed. I never get my nose red like Hester's, nor lose
my voice&mdash;but I get such a cough. I am so thankful
I have not had one here. It gives everybody so
much trouble when you get ill on a visit, and you lose
all the good of the visit, and might just as well be at
home. There is grandpapa calling. I should just
let him call if it was me. Well, Hester, if you will
go, I can't help it. Come in again if you are not
afraid of the evening air, and you shall hear all the
rest; or if you'll have me at tea time, perhaps that
will be best. I'll go to you&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>The old captain sighed as he went out. Emma
was, as it were, left speaking, standing on the step
of the door addressing Hester, as she followed her old
friend out into the dusky afternoon of one of those<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_228" id="Page_228">[Pg 228]</a></span>
black days that conclude the year. Very black days
they were on this occasion, not so cold as December
often is, without snow or any of the harsher signs of
winter, but also without sun or any of the exhilarating
sharpness of the frost. Everything was dry, but
dark, the skies leaden, the very Common showing
less green. The captain went on before with a woollen
comforter wrapped in many folds about his throat,
and woollen mittens on the hands which grasped his
stick with so much energy. He struck it against
the ground as if he had been striking some one as he
hurried away.</p>

<p>"I think that girl will be the death of us," he
said: then repented of his sharp utterance. "I told
you I thought you were a spiritual grandchild,
Hester. What the child of our child whom we lost,
who never had a child, would have been. And you
have spoiled us for the other thing&mdash;the grandchild
of common life."</p>

<p>"It is a long time since we have been out
together," said Hester, as the old man put his other
hand in its large mitten within her slender arm.</p>

<p>"And you have been in the meantime getting
into some of the muddles," he said. "It was kind of
my old wife to hand you over to me, Hester. We
all think our own experience the best. She would
like to have had you to herself, to find out all about
it, and give you the help of her old lights; but
instead of that she was self-denying, and handed you
over to me. And now let me hear what it is, and
see if the old ship's lantern will do you any good."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_229" id="Page_229">[Pg 229]</a></span></p>

<p>"Am I in any muddles?" said Hester. "I don't
know&mdash;perhaps there is nothing to tell. It is so
hard to divide one thing from another."</p>

<p>"So it is; but when it is divided it is easier to
manage," said the old captain. He paused a little
to give her time to speak: but as she did not do so
he resumed on an indifferent subject, that the girl's
confidence might not be forced. "I am always glad
when the old year is over. You will say I am an old
fool for that, as my days are so few. But the first
of January is a great deal gayer than the first of
December, though they may be exactly like each
other. When you can say there will be spring this
year&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Captain Morgan," said Hester, who had been
taking advantage of the pause without paying any
attention to what he said, "Catherine Vernon is
angry because I wear my mother's pearls. How
should that be?"</p>

<p>"You must be mistaken, my dear," said the old
captain promptly. "She has her faults, but Catherine
is never paltry, Hester. That cannot be."</p>

<p>"Either you are very much mistaken about her,
or I am much mistaken about her," Hester said.</p>

<p>The old man looked at her with a smile on his
face.</p>

<p>"I don't say anything against that. And which
of us is most likely to be right?" he asked. "I knew
her before you were born."</p>

<p>"Oh, before I was born! Does that tell you anything
about her conduct to <i>me</i>? Once I was not,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_230" id="Page_230">[Pg 230]</a></span>
but now I am; and somebody quite distinct from
other people."</p>

<p>"Very distinct!" Captain Morgan said.</p>

<p>"Then what does she mean by it?" cried Hester.
"She cannot endure the sight of me. Oh, I know
she is not paltry in one way. She does not care
about money, as some people do; but she is in
another. Why should she care about what I wear?
Did you ever hear anything about my father?" the
girl said, raising her eyes suddenly, and looking him
full in the face. The old captain was so taken by
surprise that he fell back a step and almost dropped
her arm in his dismay.</p>

<p>"About your father!"</p>

<p>"About him and Catherine Vernon&mdash;and how it
was he went away? He had as good a right to the
bank as she had, had he not? I have not thought
much about it; but I should like to know," said
Hester with more composure, "how it was that she
had it and not papa?"</p>

<p>"That was all before my time," said Captain
Morgan, who had recovered himself in the interval.
"I did not come here, you know, till after. And
then it is not as if I had been a Vernon to understand
all the circumstances. I was not of the family,
you know."</p>

<p>"That is true," said Hester thoughtfully, and she
suffered herself to be led into safer subjects without
any serious attempt to return to a question so unanswerable;
while Captain Morgan on his side was
too much alarmed by the possibility of having to<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_231" id="Page_231">[Pg 231]</a></span>
explain to her the steps which had led to her father's
expatriation to inquire any more into the "muddles"
which he had read in her countenance. And
thus they made their way home together without
any mutual satisfaction. The captain was obliged to
own to his wife afterwards that he had given Hester
no aid or good advice.</p>

<p>"She asked me about her father: and was I going
to be so brutal as to tell the poor child what has
always been concealed from her?"</p>

<p>"Concealments are never good," Mrs. Morgan said,
shaking her head. "It would be better for her to
know." But the captain had an easy victory when
he said "Should you like to be the one to tell her?"
with defiance in his voice.</p>

<p>Thus the time went on for Catherine Vernon's
great Christmas party, to which all Redborough was
asked. It was not till the day before that Hester
was bold enough to declare her intention not to go.
"You must not be angry, mamma. What should I
go for? It is no pleasure. The moment I am in
Catherine Vernon's house I am all wrong. I feel
like a beggar, a poor relation, a dependent upon her
charity; and she has no charity for me. Don't make
me go."</p>

<p>"Oh Hester, my darling," said Mrs. John. "It
would never, never do to stay away, when everybody
is there! And you her relation, that ought to
wish to do her what honour you can."</p>

<p>"Why should I wish to do her honour? She has
never been kind to us. She has never treated you<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_232" id="Page_232">[Pg 232]</a></span>
as she ought to have done. She has never behaved
to us as a relation should, or even as a gentlewoman
should."</p>

<p>"Oh hush! Hester, hush!" said Mrs. John. "You
don't know what you are speaking of. If you knew
all, you would know that Catherine has behaved to
us&mdash;better than we had any right to expect."</p>

<p>"Then let me know all, mother," said Hester,
sitting upright, her eyes shining, her whole face full
of inquiry. "I have felt lately that there must be
something which was concealed from me. Let me
know all."</p>

<p>Then Mrs. John faltered and explained. "There
is nothing for you to know. Dear, dear, you are so
literal. You take everything one says to you, Hester,
as if one meant it. There are just things that one
says&mdash;&mdash;When I said if you knew all, I meant&mdash;if
you were to consider properly, if you saw things in a
just light&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"I think you mean something more than that,"
Hester said.</p>

<p>"What should I mean more? We had no claims
upon her. Your poor father had got his share. He
had not perhaps been very prudent with it, but I
never understand anything about business. He got
his share, all that he had any right to expect.
Catherine might have said that, when we came back
so poor; but she did not. Hester, you have forgotten
what she has done for us. Oh, my dear, if
you knew all! No, I don't mean that there is anything
to know&mdash;but just if you would think&mdash;Hester,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_233" id="Page_233">[Pg 233]</a></span>
you must not insult Catherine in the sight of all
Redborough by refusing to go to her party. You
must not, indeed you must not. If you do, you will
break my heart."</p>

<p>"What I do is of no importance to Catherine
Vernon. Oh, mother, do not make me go. It is
more than I can bear."</p>

<p>"But you are of importance, and she would feel
it deeply. Oh, Hester, for my sake!" Mrs. John
cried with tears in her eyes. She would not be
turned away from the subject or postpone it. Her
daughter had never seen her so deeply in earnest,
so intent upon having her way, before. On previous
occasions it had been Hester that had won the day.
But this time the girl had to give way to the impassioned
earnestness of her mother, which in so
mild a woman was strange to see.</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_234" id="Page_234">[Pg 234]</a></span></p>




<h2><a name="CHAPTER_XIV" id="CHAPTER_XIV">CHAPTER XXX.</a></h2>

<h3>THE PARTY AT THE GRANGE.</h3>


<p>Catherine's Christmas party called forth all Redborough.
It was an assembly to which the best
people in the place considered themselves bound to
go, notwithstanding that many of the small people
were there also. Everybody indeed was supposed to
come, and all classes were represented. The respectable
old clerks, who had spent their lives in the
bank, talked upon equal terms, according to the
fiction of society, with the magnates of the town,
and Edward and Harry Vernon, and others of the
golden youth, asked their daughters to dance. The
great ladies in their jewels sat about upon the sofas,
and so did Mrs. Halifax, the cashier's wife, and Mrs.
Brown, the head clerk's, in their ribbons. All was
supposed to be equality and happiness; if it were
not so, then the fault was upon the shoulders of the
guests, and not of the hostess, who walked about
from one to another, and was so civil to Mrs.
Brown&mdash;so very civil&mdash;that Lady Freemantle could<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_235" id="Page_235">[Pg 235]</a></span>
not help whispering to Mrs. Merridew that, after all,
when a woman had once been engaged in business,
it always left a mark upon her.</p>

<p>"She is more at home with those sort of persons
than she is with the county," Lady Freemantle
said.</p>

<p>Mrs. Merridew was deeply flattered with the confidence,
and gave a most cordial assent. "It does
give a sort of an unfeminine turn of mind, though
dear Miss Vernon is so universally respected," she
said.</p>

<p>This little dialogue would have given Catherine
sincere enjoyment if she had heard it. She divined
it from the conjunction of Lady Freemantle's
diamonds with Mrs. Merridew's lace, as they leant
towards each other, and from the expression and
direction of their eyes.</p>

<p>On her side Mrs. Brown drew conclusions quite as
fallacious. "Miss Vernon is well aware how much
the young gentlemen owe to Brown," that lady said
afterwards, "and how devoted he is. She knows
his value to the business, and I am sure she sees
that a share in the bank is what he has a right to
look to."</p>

<p>This delusion, however, Catherine did not divine.</p>

<p>It was with a reluctance and repugnance indescribable
that Hester had come: but she was
there, by the side of her mother, who, a little
alarmed by the crowd, did not know what to do
with herself, until Harry Vernon interposed and led
her to the corner of a sofa, in the very midst of the<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_236" id="Page_236">[Pg 236]</a></span>
fine people, which poor Mrs. John, divided between
the pride which was too proud to take a chief place
and the consciousness that this place was her right,
hesitated greatly upon.</p>

<p>"I think I should like to be farther off," she said,
faltering; "down there somewhere," and she pointed
in the direction of the Mrs. Browns&mdash;"or anywhere,"
she added, getting confused.</p>

<p>"This is your proper place," said Harry out of his
moustache, with persistence.</p>

<p>The poor lady sat down in a nervous flutter in her
black silk gown, which looked very nice, but had
lasted a long time, and though it had been kept, so
to speak, within sight of the fashion by frequent
alterations, was very different from the elegant
mixture of velvet and satin, fresh from the hands of
a court milliner, which swept over the greater part
of the space. Mrs. John had a little cap made of a
piece of fine Mechlin upon her hair, which was still
very pretty, and of the dark brown satin kind. Her
ornaments were of the most modest description,
whereas the other lady had a set of emeralds which
were the admiration of the county. Hester stood
behind her mother very erect and proud, in her
white muslin, with her pearls, looking like a maid of
honour to a mild, discrowned queen. A maid of
honour in such circumstances would stand a great
deal more upon her dignity than her mistress would
be likely to do. This was the aspect they presented
to the lookers-on who saw them in that unusual
eminence. When Catherine perceived where her<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_237" id="Page_237">[Pg 237]</a></span>
poor pensioners were placed, she gave way to a
momentary impatience.</p>

<p>"Who put Mrs. John there?" she said to Edward,
almost with anger. "Don't you see how thoroughly
out of place she looks? You may think it shows a
fine regard for the fallen, but she would have been
much more comfortable at the other end among the
people she knows."</p>

<p>"I had nothing to do with it. I have not spoken
to them," said Edward with a certain sullenness.
He was glad to be able to exculpate himself, and yet
he despised himself all the more fiercely.</p>

<p>Catherine was vexed in a way which she herself
felt to be unworthy, but which she said to herself
was entirely justified by the awkwardness of the
situation.</p>

<p>"I suppose it is Harry that has done it," she said,
her voice softened by the discovery that Edward at
least was not to blame. "It must be said for him,
at least, that he is very faithful to his family."</p>

<p>Did she mean that <i>he</i> was not faithful? Edward
asked himself. Did even she despise him? But he
could not now change his course, or stoop to follow
Harry's example, that oaf who was inaccessible to
the fluctuations of sentiment around him, and could
do nothing but cling to his one idea. It cannot be
said, however, that either Mrs. John or Hester were
at their ease in their present position. It was true,
as Catherine had said, that with the curate's wife
Mrs. John would have been much more comfortable,
and this consciousness wounded the poor lady, who<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_238" id="Page_238">[Pg 238]</a></span>
felt now she was out of place among the people to
whom she was allied by nature. She was accustomed
to the slight of being put in a lower place,
but to feel herself so completely out of her old
position, went to her heart. She looked timidly,
poor soul, at the great lady with the emeralds,
remembering when she, too, used to be in the order
of great ladies, and wondering if in those days she
had ever despised the lowly. But when she thus
raised her eyes she found that the lady of the
emeralds was looking very fixedly at her.</p>

<p>"Surely," she said, after a little hesitation, "this
must be Lucy Westwood."</p>

<p>"Yes," said Mrs. John wistfully, investigating
the stranger with her timid eyes.</p>

<p>"Then have you forgotten 'Bridget&mdash;Fidget'?"
said the other.</p>

<p>It was a school name, and it brought a glow upon
Mrs. John's pale face. An old school-fellow! She
forgot all the painful past and her present embarrassment,
and even her daughter. Hester stood for
some time in her maid-of-honour attitude and contemplated
the conversation. She heard her mother
say, "This is my girl&mdash;the only one I have," and
felt herself crimsoning and curtseying vaguely to
some one she scarcely saw; then the stranger
added&mdash;</p>

<p>"I have three here; but I think they are all
dancing."</p>

<p>Yes, no doubt there was dancing going on, but
Hester had no part in it. She became tired, after a<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_239" id="Page_239">[Pg 239]</a></span>
while, of her post of maid of honour. Her wonderful
indignant carriage, the poise of her young head,
the proud air of independence which was evident in
her, called forth the admiration of many of the
spectators. "Who is that girl?" said the elder
people, who only came once a year, and were unacquainted
with the gossip of Redborough. "John
Vernon's daughter? Oh, that was the man who
ought to have married Catherine&mdash;he who nearly
ruined the bank. And that is her mother? How
good of Catherine to have them here." If Hester
had heard these remarks she would have had few
questions to ask about her father. But she was
unaware of the notice she was attracting, placed thus
at the head of the great drawing-room. The folding
doors had been removed and the two rooms made
into one. The girl was in the most conspicuous
position without knowing; her white figure stood
out against the wall, with her little mother in the
foreground. She stood for a long time looking out
with large eyes, full of light, upon the crowd, her
varying emotions very legible in her face. When a
creature so young and full of life feels herself
neglected and disdained, and sees others about her
whom her keen eyes cannot help but see are inferior
to herself, promoted far above her, enjoying what is
forbidden to her, finding pleasure where she has
none&mdash;yet is bound to the spot and cannot escape, it
is natural that indignation should light fires in her
eyes, and that her breast should swell and her young
countenance glow with a visionary scorn of all who<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_240" id="Page_240">[Pg 240]</a></span>
seem to scorn her. This sentiment is neither amiable
nor desirable, but it gave a sort of inspiration to
Hester&mdash;her head so erect, slightly thrown back, her
nostrils a little dilated, her mouth shut close, her
eyes large and open, regarding in full face the world
of enemies against whom, wholly or singly, she felt
herself ready to stand. All this gave a character
and individuality to her such as nothing in the room
could equal. But by and by she tired of standing,
shut out from everybody, holding up her banner.
She stole away from her mother's side, behind the
chairs, to get to somebody she knew and could
talk to. Flesh and blood cannot bear this sort of
martyrdom of pride for ever.</p>

<p>An old man was standing in her way, who made a
little movement to stop Hester as she passed. "You
will excuse an old friend, Miss Hester," he said;
"but I must tell you how glad I am to see you and
your mother. I have been looking at you both ever
since you came. She is very much changed since
I used to see her, but her sweet expression is the
same. That is a thing that will never change."</p>

<p>"I think I know you," said Hester, with the shy
frankness which was so unlike her hostile attitude.
"Did not I see you at Captain Morgan's? and you
said something to me about my mother?"</p>

<p>"I had not much time to tell you then. I should
just like to describe it to you," said the old clerk.
"I have never forgotten that day. I was in a
dreadful state of anxiety, fearing that everything
was coming to an end; and the only place I could<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_241" id="Page_241">[Pg 241]</a></span>
think of going to was the White House. That
was where your parents were staying at the time.
No, no, they were not your parents then; I think
there was a little baby that died&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"I was born abroad," said Hester, eager to catch
every word.</p>

<p>"Yes, yes, to be sure; and she was quite young,
not much older than you are now. It was in that
long room at the White House, with a window at
each end, which is the dining-room now. You will
excuse me for being a little long-winded, Miss Hester.
It was beautifully furnished, as we thought then;
and there was a harp and a piano. Does your
mamma ever play the harp now? No, no, I ought
to remember, that has quite gone out of fashion.
She had her hair high up on her head like this," said
Mr. Rule, trying to give a pantomimic description
on the top of his own grey head of the high bows
which had once adorned Mrs. John's. "She had a
white dress on, far shorter than you wear them now;
and little slippers with crossed bands, sandals they
used to call them. Oh, I remember everything like
a picture! Ladies used to wear little short sleeves
in those days, and low dresses. She had a little
scarf round her over one shoulder. What a pretty
creature she was, to be sure! I had been so wretched
and anxious that the sight of her as I came rushing
in, had the strangest effect upon me. All bank
business and our troubles about money, and the
terror of a run, which was what I was frightened
for, seemed nothing but ugly dreams, without any<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_242" id="Page_242">[Pg 242]</a></span>
reality in them. I dare say you don't know, Miss
Hester, what I mean by a run?"</p>

<p>"No, indeed," said Hester, a little impatient;
"but I should like to know what happened after."</p>

<p>"A run on the bank," said the old clerk, "is the
most terrible thing in all creation. A battle is
nothing to it&mdash;for in a battle you can at least fight
for your life. It happens when the partners or the
company, or whatever they may be, have had losses,
or are reported to have had losses, and a rumour
gets up against the bank. Sometimes it may be a
long time threatening, sometimes it may get up in a
single day&mdash;but as soon as the rumour gets the length
of a panic, everybody that has money deposited
comes to draw it out, and everybody that has a note
of the bank comes for his money. In those days
Vernon's issued notes, like all the other great country
banks. I was in mortal terror for a run: I never
was in such a state in my life. And it was then, as
I told you, Miss Hester, that I went to your mother.
Of course we had not money enough to meet it&mdash;the
most solvent could scarcely hope to have that at
a moment's notice. Next day was the market day,
and I knew that, as sure as life&mdash;&mdash;! I have passed
through many a troublesome moment, but never one
like that."</p>

<p>And, as if even the thinking of it was more than
he could bear, the old clerk took out his handkerchief
and wiped his forehead. Hester had listened
with great interest, but still with a little impatience:
for though the run upon the bank would have<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_243" id="Page_243">[Pg 243]</a></span>
interested her at another time, it was more than
her attention was equal to now.</p>

<p>"But was not my father here as well as my
mother?" said Hester, in her clear voice, unconscious
of any need to subdue it.</p>

<p>Mr. Rule looked at her with a startled air and a
half-involuntary "Hush!"</p>

<p>"Your father!" he said, with a tone of consternation.
"Oh; the fact was that your father&mdash;did
not happen to be there at the time."</p>

<p>Hester waved her hand slightly as a token for him
to go on. She had a feeling that these words were
of more importance than they seemed to be, but they
confused her, and she did not as yet see what this
importance was. She remembered that she had
thought so when he told her this incident before.</p>

<p>"Where was I?" said Mr. Rule. "Oh, yes, I
remember; just going into the White House with
my mind full of trouble, not knowing what to do.
Well, Miss Hester, when I found that your&mdash;I mean
when I discovered that your&mdash;mother was alone, I
told her the dreadful condition I was in&mdash;Nobody to
say what to do, no chief authority to direct, and
market-day to-morrow, and a run as sure as fate.
Now, you know, we could have telegraphed all over
the country, but there was no such thing as a
telegraph then. I had to explain it to her just as
I have to you, and I feel sure she didn't understand
me in the very least. She only knew there was
money wanted. She stepped across the room in her
pretty sandals, with her scarf hanging from her<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_244" id="Page_244">[Pg 244]</a></span>
shoulders, as if she had been going to play her harp,
and opened a little bit of a desk, one of those
gimcrack things, all rosewood and velvet, which
were the fashion then, and took out all her money
and brought it to me. It was in our own notes,
poor dear," said old Rule, with a little laugh; "and
it came to just twenty pounds. She would have
made me take it&mdash;forced it upon me. She did not
understand a bit. She was full of trouble and
sympathy, and ready to give up everything. Ah,
I have often told Miss Vernon since. It was not
want of will; it was only that she did not
understand."</p>

<p>"I am sure you mean to speak kindly of mamma,"
said Hester, with a quick blush of alarmed pride;
"but I don't think it is so difficult to make her
understand. And what did you do after that? Was
there a run&mdash;and how did you provide&mdash;?"</p>

<p>She did not know what to say, the questions
seemed to get into her throat and choke her. There
was something else which she could not understand
which must soon be made clear. She gave furtive
glances at the old clerk, but did not look him in
the face.</p>

<p>"Ah, I went to Miss Vernon. She was but a
young lady then. Oh, I don't mean to say young
like you. It is thirty years ago. She was older
than your pretty young mamma, and though she
had a great share in the business she never had
taken any part in it. But she was come of a family
that have all had fine heads for business. Look at<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_245" id="Page_245">[Pg 245]</a></span>
Mr. Edward now: what a clear understanding he
has, and sees exactly the right thing to do, whatever
happens. She was a little shocked and startled just
at first, but she took it up in a moment, no man
could have done it better. She signed away all her
money in the twinkling of an eye, and saved the
bank. When all the crowd of the country folk came
rushing to draw out their money, she stepped in&mdash;well,
like a kind of goddess to us, Miss Hester&mdash;and
paid in almost her whole fortune, all her mother's
money, every penny she had out of the business,
and pulled us through. I can remember her too, as
if it had been yesterday, the way she stepped in&mdash;with
her head held high, and a kind of a triumph
about her; something like what I have seen in
yourself, my dear young lady."</p>

<p>"Seen in me! You have never seen me with any
triumph about me," cried Hester, bitterly. "And
where have you seen me? I scarcely know you.
Ah, that was because of the money she had. My
mother, with her twenty pounds, what could she
do? But Catherine was rich. It was because of
her money."</p>

<p>"Her money was a great deal: but it was not
the money alone. It was the heart and the courage
she had. We had nobody to tell us what to do&mdash;but
after she came, all went well. She had such a
head for business."</p>

<p>Hester could not stand and listen to Catherine's
praises; but she was entirely absorbed in the narrative.
It seemed terrible to her that she had not<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_246" id="Page_246">[Pg 246]</a></span>
been there to be able to step in as Catherine had
done. But there was another question pressing
upon her which she had asked already, and to which
she had got no reply. She shrank from repeating it
yet felt a force upon her to do so. She fixed her
large widely-opened eyes upon the speaker, so as
to lose none of the indications of his face.</p>

<p>"Will you tell me," she said, "how it was that
you had, as you say, nobody to tell you anything&mdash;no
one at the head&mdash;nobody to say what was to
be done?"</p>

<p>Old Mr. Rule did not immediately reply. He
made a little pause, and shuffled with his feet,
looking down at them, not meeting her eyes.</p>

<p>"Hester," said Ellen Merridew, who was passing,
and paused on her partner's arm to interfere, "why
don't you dance? What do you mean by not
dancing? What are you doing here behind backs?
I have been looking for you everywhere."</p>

<p>"I prefer to be here," Hester answered, shortly;
"never mind me, please. Mr. Rule, will you answer
me? I want to know."</p>

<p>"You asked how it was that we&mdash;&mdash; What was
it you asked, Miss Hester? I am very glad to see
you so interested: but you ought to be dancing,
not talking to an old man, as Mrs. Merridew
says."</p>

<p>"I think you are all in a plot against me," said
Hester, impatiently; "why was it you were left
without a head? What had happened? Mr. Rule,"
cried the girl, "you know what I asked, and you<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_247" id="Page_247">[Pg 247]</a></span>
know why I am so anxious. You are trying to put
me off. What does it all mean?"</p>

<p>"It is an old story," he said; "I cannot tell what
tempted me to begin about it. It was seeing you
and your mother for the first time. You were not
at Miss Vernon's party last year?"</p>

<p>"What has that to do with it?" cried Hester.
"If you will not tell me, say so. I shall find out
some other way."</p>

<p>"My dear young lady, ask me anything. Don't
find out any other way. I will come and see you, if
your mamma will permit me, and tell you everything
about the old days. But I can't keep you
longer now. And, besides, it would need a great
deal of explanation. I was foolish to begin about it
here, keeping you out of your natural amusement.
But I'll come and tell you, Miss Hester, with
pleasure," said the old man, putting on a show of
easy cordiality, "any day you will name."</p>

<p>"Hester," said another voice over her head,
"Ellen says I am not to let you stay here. Come
and see the supper-room. And the hall is very
pretty. I am not to go without you, Ellen says."</p>

<p>"Oh, what do I care for Ellen!" cried Hester,
exasperated. "Go away, Harry; go and dance and
amuse yourself. I don't want you or any one.
Mr. Rule&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>But the old clerk had seized his opportunity. He
had made a dart at some one else on the other side
while Hester turned to reply to Harry's demand.
The girl found herself abandoned when she turned<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_248" id="Page_248">[Pg 248]</a></span>
to him again. There had been a gradual shifting in
the groups about while she stood absorbed listening
to his story. She was standing now among people
who were strange to her, and who looked at her
curiously, knowing her to be "one of the family."
As she met their curious eyes, Hester, though she
had a high courage, felt her heart fail her. She
was glad to fall back upon her cousin's support.</p>

<p>"I think you are all in a conspiracy against me,"
she said; but she took Harry's arm. He never
abandoned her in any circumstances. Edward had
not spoken to her, nor noticed her presence; but
Harry never failed. In her excitement and disappointment
she turned to him with a sense that here
she could not go wrong. As for Harry, to whom she
was seldom so complacent, he drew her arm within
his own with a flush of pleasure.</p>

<p>"I know you don't think much of me," he said,
"but surely I am as good as that old fellow!" a
speech at which Hester could not but laugh. "I
should like to know what he was saying to you,"
Harry said.</p>

<p>"He was telling me about the run on the bank
and how Catherine saved it. Do you know&mdash;I
wonder&mdash;&mdash; Had my father never anything to do
with it?" Hester said.</p>

<p>They were making their way through the crowd
at the end of the room. And Harry's countenance
was not expressive. Hester thought the stare in his
eyes was directed to somebody behind who had
pushed against her. She was not suspicious that<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_249" id="Page_249">[Pg 249]</a></span>
Harry could hide from her any knowledge he
possessed.</p>

<p>"That was ages before my time," he said very
steadily. "You might as well ask me about the
flood;" and so led her on through the many groups
about the door, entirely unsuspicious that he, too,
for whom she had an affectionate contempt, had
baulked her. She allowed him to take her over all
the lighted rooms which opened into each other:
the hall, the library, the room blazing with lights
and decorations, which was prepared for supper.
Hester had never been before at one of these great
assemblies. And she could not keep herself entirely
unmoved by the dazzling of the lights, the warmth
and largeness of the entertainment. A sort of pride
came upon her, surprising her in spite of herself:
though she was so humble a member of the family,
and subject under this roof to slights and scorns,
yet she was a Vernon, and could not escape some
reflection of the family glory which centred in
Catherine. And as she went into the hall a still
more strange sensation suddenly came over Hester.
She caught sight, in a large mirror, of herself
stepping forward, her head held high in its habitual
poise of half indignant energy, and a certain swiftness
in her air and movement, a sentiment of forward
motion and progress, very familiar to everybody who
knew her, but which brought suddenly to her mind
old Rule's description, "stepping in with a kind
of triumph about her, as I have seen yourself."
"Triumph!" Hester said secretly within herself,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_250" id="Page_250">[Pg 250]</a></span>
and coloured high, with a sensation of mingled
pain and pleasure, which no words could have described.
She did not know what it meant; but it
stirred her strangely. If she had been in these
circumstances she would have acted like Catherine.
The story of her mother in her gentle ignorance,
which the old clerk thought so much of, did not
affect the high-spirited girl as did the picture of the
other putting herself in the breach, taking upon her
own shoulders the weight of the falling house.
Hester felt that she, too, could have done this.
Her breast swelled, her breath came short with an
impulse of impatience and longing to have such an
opportunity, to show the mettle that was in her.
But how could she do it? Catherine was rich, but
Hester was poor. In this way she was diverted for
the moment from her anxiety. The question as to
how the bank came into that peril, the suspicion
that her father must have been somehow connected
with it, the heat of her research after the key of the
mystery, faded away for the moment in a vague,
general excitement and eager yet vain desire to have
it in her power to do something, she also&mdash;&mdash;a
desire which many a young mind has felt as well
as Hester; to have that golden opportunity&mdash;the
occasion to do a heroic deed, to save some one, to
venture your own life, to escape the bonds of every
day, and once have a chance of showing what was in
you! This was not the "chance" which Emma
Ashton desired, but it appealed to every sentiment
in Hester. The strong longing for it seemed almost<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_251" id="Page_251">[Pg 251]</a></span>
to promise a possibility, as she walked along in a
dream, without noticing Harry by her side. And
he did not disturb her by conversation. It was
enough for Harry to feel her hand on his arm.
He had never very much to say, and he did not
insist upon saying it. He was content to lead her
about, to show her everything; and the sensation
of taking care of her was pleasant to his heart.</p>

<p>When they reached the hall, however, they became
aware of a late arrival, which had a certain effect
upon both. Standing near the great door, which
had been opened a minute before to admit him,
sending a thrill of cold night air through the whole
warm succession of rooms, stood Roland Ashton.
Hester was aware that he was expected, but not
that he was coming here. A servant was helping
him off with his coat, and Edward stood beside him
in eager conversation. Edward's countenance, generally
toned down to the air of decorum and self-command
which he thought necessary, was excited
and glowing. And Harry, too, lighted up when he
saw the new comer. "Ah, there's Ashton!" he
said; while from one of the other doors Catherine
Vernon herself, with a white shawl over her shoulders,
came out from amidst her other guests to
welcome her kinsman. It was a wonderful reception
for a young man who was not distinguished
either by rank or wealth. Hester had to hang
back, keeping persistently in the shade, to prevent
her companion from hurrying forward into the
circle of welcoming faces.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_252" id="Page_252">[Pg 252]</a></span></p>

<p>"I felt the cold air from the door at the very end
of the drawing-room," Catherine said; "but though
it made me shiver it was not unwelcome, Roland.
I knew that it meant that you had come."</p>

<p>"I wish my coming had not cost you a shiver,"
Roland cried.</p>

<p>"One moment; I must say how d'ye do to him,"
said Harry in Hester's ear; and even he, the faithfulest
one, left her for a moment to hold out his
hand to the new comer.</p>

<p>The girl stood apart, sheltering herself under the
shade of the plants with which the hall was filled,
and looked on at this scene. There was in the
whole group a curious connection with herself.
Even to Catherine she, perhaps, poor girl as she
was, was the guest among all the others who roused
the keenest feeling. Edward, who did not venture
to look at her here, had given her every reason to
believe that his mind was full of her. Harry had put
his life at her disposal. Roland&mdash;Roland had taken
possession of her mind and thoughts for a few weeks
with a completeness of influence which probably he
never intended, which, perhaps, was nothing at all
to him, which it made Hester blush to remember.
They all stood together, their faces lighted up with
interest while she looked on. Hester stood under
a great myrtle bush, which shaded her face, and
looked at them in the thrill of the excitement which
the previous events of the evening had called forth.
A sort of prophetic sense that the lives of all were
linked with her own, a presentiment that between<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_253" id="Page_253">[Pg 253]</a></span>
them and among them it would be hers to work
either for weal or woe, came over her like a sudden
revelation. It was altogether fanciful and absurd
she felt; but the impression was so strong that she
turned and fled, with a sudden impulse to avoid the
fate that seemed almost to overshadow her as she
stood and looked at them. She, who a moment
before had been longing for the heroic opportunity,
the power of interposing as Catherine had interposed,
felt all the panic of a child come over her as she
stood and gazed at the four people, not one of whom
was indifferent to her. She hurried out of the comparative
quiet of the hall into the crowd, and made
her way with a trembling of nervous excitement to
where her mother sat. Mrs. John was still seated
serenely on her sofa talking of old school-days and
comrades with the lady of the emeralds. She was
serene, yet there was a little gentle excitement
about her too, a little additional colour upon her
soft cheek. Hester, with her heart beating loudly
and a strange tumult in her veins, took refuge
behind her mother with a sense of protection which
she had never felt before. The soft nature which
was ready to be touched by any gentle emotion,
which understood none of life's problems, yet, by
patience and simplicity, sailed over them all, is often
a shield to those that see more and feel more.
Behind her unconscious mother Hester seemed to
herself to take refuge from her fate.</p>

<p>It was a great elevation to Mrs. John to sit there
at the upper part of the room, among the great<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_254" id="Page_254">[Pg 254]</a></span>
ladies, out of the crowd of less distinguished persons.
Her feeling of embarrassed shyness and sense of
being out of place had all vanished when she discovered
her old friend; and from that time she had
begun to enjoy herself with a soothing consciousness
that all proper respect was paid to her, and that at
last, without any doing of hers, all, as she said to
herself, had come right. She assented with gentle
cordiality to all that was said to her about the
beauty of the house, and the perfection of the
arrangements.</p>

<p>"Catherine is wonderful," she said; "she has
such a head; she understands everything," and not
a feeling in her heart contradicted her words.</p>

<p>That evening was, in its way, a gentle triumph to
the gentle little woman. Hester had disappeared
from her for a time, and had been, she had no doubt,
enjoying herself; and then she had come back and
stood dutifully by her mother, such a maid of honour
as any queen might have been proud of. She had
a thousand things to say of the assembly; of dear
Bridget Wilton, who recollected her so well, and
who was now quite a great person; of the prettiness
of the party, and the girls' dresses, and all the light
and brilliancy of the scene&mdash;when at last it was all
over and they had reached home.</p>

<p>"Now I am sure you are glad you went," she
said, with innocent confidence. "It is a long, long
time since I have spent so pleasant an evening.
You see Catherine would not allow me to be overlooked
when it was really a great party. She knows<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_255" id="Page_255">[Pg 255]</a></span>
very well what is due. She did not mind at those
little evenings, which are of no importance; but
to-night you could see how different it was. Bridget
insisted that Sir John himself should take me to
supper. No, dear, it was nothing more than was
right, but it shows, what I always thought, that no
neglect was ever intended. And Catherine was
very kind. I am sure now you are glad you
went."</p>

<p>Was she glad she had gone? Hester could not
tell. She closed the door between her and her
mother as if she were afraid that Mrs. John in
her unusual exhilaration might read her thoughts.
These thoughts were almost too great to be confined
within her own spirit. As she lay down in
the dark she seemed to see the light shining all
about her, the groups in the ball-room&mdash;the old
man garrulous, deep in the revelations of the past,
and the cluster of figures all standing together under
the light of the lamps, exchanging questions which
meant, though she could scarcely tell how, the
future to Hester. Perhaps, on the whole, it was
true, and she was glad she had gone.</p>

<h2><a name="CHAPTER_I" id="CHAPTER_I">CHAPTER XXXI.</a></h2>

<h3>BUSINESS AND LOVE.</h3>


<p>Roland had but a few days to spend at Redborough,
where he came on the footing of an intimate
friend and relation, sought and courted on all
hands. His time was already portioned out among
the Vernons before he came to pay his respects to
Mrs. John and her daughter, though that was on
the morning after his arrival. At a still earlier hour
Emma had rushed in very tearful and dejected to
beg Hester to intercede for her that she might not
go away.</p>

<p>"If I go now <i>he</i> may never speak at all," Emma
said. "I am sure I did everything I could last night
to bring it on. I told him Roland had come for me,
that he couldn't do without me any longer; and if
you could only have seen him, Hester! he grew
quite white, poor fellow, and his eyes as big as<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_2" id="Page_2">[Pg 2]</a></span>
saucers! I don't believe it is his fault. It must
be his people; so often, when things are going just
as you wish, their people will interfere. I am sure
he is quite miserable. And if he doesn't speak now,
I dare say he will never speak."</p>

<p>"How can you talk as if it were a matter of business?"
cried Hester; "if he cares for you he is sure
to 'speak,' as you call it. And as for bringing it
on&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"But, of course, it is a matter of business," said
Emma, "and very important business too. What
can be so important for a girl as settling? It is all
very well for you to talk, but I am the youngest, and
I have no fixed home, and I must think of myself.
If he comes forward it makes all the difference to
me. Why, Roland and everybody will think twice
as much of me if I have an offer. Hester, there's a
dear, do persuade Roland to let me stay. He doesn't
want me a bit, that's all talk; he is just as happy
without me. Perhaps he will tell you they have had
enough of me here; but they don't say so, and you're
not bound to go and inquire into people's feelings if
they don't say so. I do believe grandpapa is tired of
having me, but he will never turn me out; and when
it is so essential to my best interests! Hester, I
think you might have a little fellow-feeling. There's
Edward Vernon, I'm sure you would be more comfortable
if he were to&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>Hester turned upon her indiscreet companion with
a blaze of indignation. The fact that there was
truth in it made it doubly odious. Her whole<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_3" id="Page_3">[Pg 3]</a></span>
frame trembled with angry shame. She threw up
her hand with an impatient gesture, which frightened
and silenced Emma, but which Hester herself
afterwards felt to be a sort of appeal to her forbearance&mdash;the
establishment of a kind of confidence.</p>

<p>"What is that about Edward Vernon?" said Mrs.
John, whose tranquil ear had caught something,
naturally of that part of the conversation which it
was most expedient she should not hear.</p>

<p>Emma paused, and consulted Hester with her eyes,
who, however, averted her countenance and would
not ask forbearance. A rapid debate ensued in
Emma's mind. What is the use, she asked herself,
of having a mother if you cannot tell her everything,
and get her to help you? But on the other
hand, if Hester did not wish it spoken of she did not
dare to oppose an auxiliary who might be of so much
service to her. So she answered carelessly&mdash;</p>

<p>"Oh, nothing! but don't you think, Mrs. Vernon,
you who know the world, that for a girl to go away
just when a gentleman is coming to the point, is a
great pity? And just as likely as not nothing may
ever come of it if her people interfere like this and
drag her away."</p>

<p>"My dear," said Mrs. John, astonished, though
mollified by the compliment to her knowledge of the
world, "I cannot call to mind that I have ever heard
such a question discussed before."</p>

<p>"Oh, perhaps not&mdash;not in general society; but
when we are all women together, and a kind of relations,
I am sure it is only charity to wish that a girl<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_4" id="Page_4">[Pg 4]</a></span>
like me might get settled. And when you have had
an offer you take such a different position, even with
your own people. I want Hester to ask Roland to
let me stay."</p>

<p>"Hester! but why Hester? If you wish it I will
speak to Mr. Ashton&mdash;or your grandparents would be
more suitable," Mrs. John said.</p>

<p>And it was at this moment that Roland himself
came in to pay his respects. When he had said
everything that was polite&mdash;nay, more than polite,
ingratiating and devoted, as if in a subdued and
reverential way he was paying his court to the
mother rather than the daughter&mdash;he contrived to
make his way to where Hester sat apart, working
with great but spasmodic energy, and not yet recovered
from the ferment into which Emma had
plunged her. "I scarcely saw you last night," he
said.</p>

<p>"There were so many people to see," Hester
replied, with a cloudy smile, without lifting her eyes.</p>

<p>"Yes, there were a great many people. And
to-morrow night, I hear, at the Merridews&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"I am not going."</p>

<p>"No? I thought I should have been able to see
a little of you there. A ball-room is good for that,
that one&mdash;I mean, two&mdash;may be alone in it now and
then&mdash;and there were many things I wanted to say.
But I thought you did go."</p>

<p>"Yes, often; but I am tired of it!" cried Hester.
"It is too much; one wants something more than
folly in one's life."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_5" id="Page_5">[Pg 5]</a></span></p>

<p>"This is not folly," he said, looking round at the
quiet little room, the tranquil lady by the fire, the
work at which Hester's hands were so busy. She
was seated near the side window which looked out
upon the road.</p>

<p>"No; this is dulness&mdash;this is nothing," she said;
"not living at all, but only going on because one
cannot help it."</p>

<p>"I suppose, on the whole, the greater part of life
is that; but you, with the power to make others
happy, with so much before you&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"I am sure the life that I know is all that,"
cried Hester; "we are here, we don't know why,
we cannot get out of it, we must go on with it.
It is a necessity to live, and prepare your dinner
every day and mend your clothes, not because you
wish to do so, but because you can't help yourself.
And then the only relief to it is folly."</p>

<p>"Don't call an innocent little dance folly, with all
its opportunities. If it gave me the chance of a long
quiet talk&mdash;with you."</p>

<p>"If that is not folly, it is nonsense," Hester said,
with a laugh, not unmoved by the tone, not unsubdued
by the eyes.</p>

<p>"You may think so, but I don't. I have looked
forward to it for so long. If life is nothing to you
here, fancy what it is to me in the Stock
Exchange."</p>

<p>"I have no doubt it is very interesting to you. It
is something to do: it is change, and thought, and
risk, and all that one wants."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_6" id="Page_6">[Pg 6]</a></span></p>

<p>"That is what Edward Vernon says," said Roland.
"He, too, finds life monotonous&mdash;I suppose because
he has everything he wishes for."</p>

<p>"Has he everything he wishes for?" said Hester,
with a catch of her breath, and a sudden glance up
with keen, questioning eyes. The next moment she
bent her head again over her work. "What I want
is not dancing," she said.</p>

<p>"It is work, according to the fashion of young
ladies. You don't know when you are well off. You
have always wanted work," said Roland, "and barbarous
parents will not let you. You want to go and
teach wretched little children, and earn a little
miserable money. You to be wasted on that! Ah! you
have something a great deal better to do."</p>

<p>"What?" said Hester, raising her eyes and fixing
them upon him. "I should like, not that, but to
do as Catherine Vernon did," she cried, lighting up
in every line of her animated countenance. "I
should like to step in when ruin was coming and
prop it up on my shoulders as she did, and meet the
danger, and overcome it&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"I thought you hated Catherine Vernon," Roland
cried.</p>

<p>"I never said so," cried Hester; and then, after
a pause, "but if I did, what does that matter? I
should like to do what she did. Something of one's
own free will&mdash;something that no one can tell you
or require you to do&mdash;which is not even your duty
bound down upon you. Something voluntary, even
dangerous&mdash;&mdash;" She paused again, with a smile<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_7" id="Page_7">[Pg 7]</a></span>
and a blush at her own vehemence, and shook her
head. "That is exactly what I shall never have it
in my power to do."</p>

<p>"I hope not, indeed, if it is dangerous," said
Roland, with all that eyes could say to make the
words eloquent. "Pardon me; but don't you think
that is far less than what you have in your power?
You can make others do: you can inspire (isn't that
what Lord Lytton says?) and reward. That is a
little highflown, perhaps. But there is nothing a
man might not do, with you to encourage him. You
make me wish to be a hero."</p>

<p>He laughed, but Hester did not laugh. She gave
him a keen look, in which there was a touch of
disdain. "Do you really think," she said, "that the
charm of inspiring, as you call it, is what any
reasonable creature would prefer to doing? To make
somebody else a hero rather than be a hero yourself?
Women would need to be disinterested indeed if they
like that best. I don't see it. Besides, we are not
in the days of chivalry. What could you be inspired
to do&mdash;make better bargains on your Stock Exchange?
and reward&mdash;&mdash; Oh, that is not the way
it is looked at nowadays. You think it is you
who&mdash;&mdash;" Here Hester paused, with a rising
colour, "I will not say what I was going to say,"
she said.</p>

<p>"What you were going to say was cruel. Besides,
it was not true. I must know best, being on the
side of the slandered. A man who is worth calling
a man can have but one opinion on that subject."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_8" id="Page_8">[Pg 8]</a></span></p>

<p>Hester looked at him again with a serious criticism,
which embarrassed Roland. She was not
regarding the question lightly, as a mere subject of
provocative talk, but was surveying him as if to
read how far he was true and how far fictitious.
Before he could say anything she shook her head
with a little sigh.</p>

<p>"Besides," she said, "it was not a hero I was
thinking of. If anybody, it was Catherine Vernon."</p>

<p>"Whom you don't like. These women, who step
out of their sphere, they may do much to be
respected, they may be of great use; but&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"You mean that men don't like them," said
Hester, with a smile; "but then women do; and,
after all, we are the half of creation&mdash;or more."</p>

<p>"Women do! Oh, no; that is a mistake. Let us
ask the company present&mdash;your mother and my sister."</p>

<p>Hester put out her hand to stop him. "That
goes far deeper," she said, with a rising blush.
What did she mean? Roland was sufficiently versed
in all the questions of this kind, which are discussed
in idleness to promote flirtation. But he did not
know why she should blush so deeply, or why her
forehead should contract when he claimed his sister
and her mother together as representatives of
women. They were so, better than Hester herself
was. Mrs. John represented all the timid opinions
and obstinate prejudices of weakness; all that is
gently conventional and stereotyped in that creature
conventionally talked about as Woman from the
beginning of time; while the other represented that<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_9" id="Page_9">[Pg 9]</a></span>
other, vulgarer type of feminine character which,
without being either strong enough or generous
enough to strike out a new belief, makes a practical
and cynical commentary upon the old one, and
considers man as the natural provider of woman's
comfort, and, therefore, indispensable, to be secured
as any other source of income and ease ought to be
secured. Hester was wounded and ashamed that
her mother should be classed with Emma, but could
say nothing against it; and she was moved with a
high indignation to think that Roland was right.
But he had not the least idea what she could mean,
and she had no mind to enlighten him. Their
conversation came to an end accordingly; and the
sound of the others came in.</p>

<p>"I don't see why I should go away," said Emma.
"For, whatever he may choose to say, Roland
doesn't want me, not a bit. Elizabeth is a very
good cook, and that's all a man thinks of. I couldn't
do him any good at home, and he doesn't like my
acquaintances. A girl can't live without friends,
can she, Mrs. John? If you are to have any amusement
at all, you must be getting it when you're
about twenty, that is the time. But men never
care: they go out, and they have their own friends
separate, and they never think of you. But here,
without bothering him a bit, I have lots of nice
people, and grandmamma has never said she was
tired of me. Then why should he take me
away?"</p>

<p>"There is no reason for talking of that just now<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_10" id="Page_10">[Pg 10]</a></span>
at all," said Mrs. John politely, "for Mr. Roland
is not going away himself as yet."</p>

<p>"Oh, he cannot stay long," cried Emma, "he
oughtn't to stay; he has got his business&mdash;not like
me that have nothing to call me. Edward Vernon
wouldn't like it a bit if Roland stayed away from
his business."</p>

<p>"I am always hearing the name of Edward
Vernon," said Mrs. John; "you mentioned it to
Hester just now. What has he to do with Hester
or with Mr. Roland's business? Though Catherine
Vernon thinks so much of him, he is not one of my
favourites. I like his cousin Harry better."</p>

<p>"And so do I," Roland said.</p>

<p>They all looked at him with surprise, and Hester
with a sudden increase of colour. She was angry,
though she could not have told why.</p>

<p>"He is very hot and eager in business," Roland
said. "I suppose I ought to like him the better for
that. And he has a keen eye too; but it goes to
his head, and that is what one never should allow
one's business to do."</p>

<p>"Ah!" cried Mrs. John, "if it can be prevented,
Mr. Roland. That was what happened to my dear
husband. He could not be cool, as, I suppose, it is
right to be. But sometimes, don't you think one
likes a person better for not calculating too much,
for letting himself be carried away?"</p>

<p>Roland looked more dark than he had ever been
seen to look before, and responded vaguely, "Perhaps,"
with a face that had no doubtfulness in it.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_11" id="Page_11">[Pg 11]</a></span></p>

<p>"Why should he not be hot and eager?" cried
Hester; "I understand that very well. Everything
is quiet here. A man, when he gets out of this still
atmosphere, wants a little excitement, and to fling
himself into it."</p>

<p>"Ah!" said Mrs. John, "that is what your poor
father always said."</p>

<p>But Roland had never looked so unsympathetic.
"A man may lose his head in love or in war, or in
adventure, or in pleasure, but he must not lose it on
the Stock Exchange," he said; then, looking up, with
an uneasy laugh, "I need not warn you, ladies, need
I? for you will never lose your heads about shares and
premiums. I am glad to think I am a very steady
fellow myself."</p>

<p>"Oh, steady!" cried Mrs. John, alarmed. "I
hope, I am sure, they are all <i>quite</i> steady. I
never heard a word to the contrary. It would be
dreadful for poor Catherine; after all, though we are
not very good friends&mdash;not such good friends as I
should wish to be&mdash;it would be dreadful; for if
Edward was not steady&mdash;&mdash; Oh, I hope, Mr.
Roland, you are mistaken. I hope that it is
not so."</p>

<p>"He means a steady head, mother; there is no
question of anything else," said Hester, very red
and troubled. Her secret consciousness in respect
to Edward made life and conversation very difficult
for her: she could not bear any animadversion upon
him, though in her own heart she made many; and
at the same time she could not defend him openly.<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_12" id="Page_12">[Pg 12]</a></span>
What was he to her more than Harry was? The
same far-off cousin&mdash;old friend: not so much, indeed,
as Harry, for all the world knew that Harry
would fain have established another relationship
had it seemed good in Hester's eyes.</p>

<p>"I meant nothing against his morals," Roland
said.</p>

<p>"That is a great relief to my mind," said Mrs.
John, "for Catherine Vernon is a good woman,
though she and I have never been great friends;
and it is a terrible thing to set your heart upon a
child and have him turn out badly. There is
nothing so heartrending as that. One of my
mother's sisters, Aunt Eliza, of whom you have
heard me talk, Hester, had a son&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Oh, mamma, I don't think we want to hear
about that."</p>

<p>"And you were coming out for a walk," said
Emma, who saw that her own affairs were slipping
out of notice. "Didn't she say she would come out
for a walk? And if we are going we had better
not be long about it, for the days are so short at
this time of the year."</p>

<p>"Put on your hat, Hester; it will do you good.
You change colour so I do not know what to make
of it," her mother said.</p>

<p>"And so do I now," cried Emma; "they always
tell me it is indigestion, but that is not a nice
reason to give when people think you are blushing
about something. It is very disagreeable. Mine
comes on often after dinner when we dine early, and<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_13" id="Page_13">[Pg 13]</a></span>
all the afternoon I am just a fright! It is a blessing
it goes off towards evening when one is seeing
people. Roland, you must take Hester and me into
Redborough. I want to buy some gloves, and I dare
say so does she, for the Merridews to-night."</p>

<p>"She is not going to the Merridews," said Mrs.
John, with a plaintive sound in her voice.</p>

<p>"Oh, she told us something about that, but I
didn't believe it was true. Why shouldn't she go
to the Merridews?&mdash;she that is always made so
much of, just like the sister of the house. If I
had that position I never should miss one evening;
and, indeed, I never have since I had my first
invitation. Grandpapa did not like it at first, but
of course he got reconciled. Oh, here you are,
Hester; how quickly you do dress! To be sure,
you never put on anything but that pea-coat of
yours. But I don't like drawing on my gloves as
I go out, as you do; I like to put them on carefully,
and smooth them, and button them up."</p>

<p>"You are always so tidy," said Mrs. John, with a
faint sigh. She could not but feel it would be an
advantage if Hester, though so much superior,
would get some of Emma's ways. She was so
neat: never a hair out of order, or a shoe-tie
loose. Whereas, now and then, in her own child,
there were imperfections. But she smiled as she
looked after them, going out to the door to see them
go. Hester, with her varying complexion (which
had nothing to do with her digestion), threw up her
head to meet the wind with a movement so vigorous,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_14" id="Page_14">[Pg 14]</a></span>
so full of grace and life, that it was a pleasure to
see. The mother thought that it was pretty to
watch her drawing on her gloves, though, perhaps,
it would have been tidier to button them carefully
as Emma did, before she came down stairs; but
then in those days gloves had few buttons and
were easily managed. As soon as they had gone
out of the gate of the Vernonry, Emma gave Hester
a significant look, and even a nudge, if it must be
told, and begged them to walk on while she ran in
for an umbrella which she had forgotten. "For it
always rains when one hasn't an umbrella," she
said. It cost Hester an effort to remember what
the look and the nudge meant. Then she laughed
as she watched the schemer down to Captain
Morgan's door.</p>

<p>"Why do you want to take Emma away?" she
said. "She seems to be happy here."</p>

<p>"Do you think she makes the old people happier?
They don't say anything, but she seems to me to worry
my old grandfather. I don't want to take her away.
She has her little schemes on hand, no doubt, and
means to settle or something; but I cannot let her
tire out the old people. They are part of my religion,"
Roland said. This, too, was meant as provocation to
draw Hester on to discuss the question of religion,
perhaps to an attempt to convert him to sounder
views, which is a very fruitful method. He looked
at her with a pleased defiance in his eyes. But
Hester was not to be drawn out on this subject. She
had no dogmatic teaching in her, and did not feel<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_15" id="Page_15">[Pg 15]</a></span>
qualified to discuss a man's religion. Instead, she
returned to the subject of their previous discussion,
herself abandoning Emma's cause.</p>

<p>"What do you do on the Stock Exchange?" she
said.</p>

<p>"That is a tremendous question. I don't know
how to answer it. I should have to give you a
lecture upon shares, and companies, and all the
vicissitudes of the Funds."</p>

<p>"These, I suppose, are your material, just as
written things are the material of a newspaper editor.
I understand that," said Hester, "what I want to
know is what you do."</p>

<p>"We buy and we sell," he said, with a laugh. "We
are no better than any shopkeeper. We buy a thing
when it is cheap, and hold it till it becomes dear,
and then we sell it again."</p>

<p>"But who," said Hester, with a little scorn, "is so
silly as to buy things <i>when they are dear</i>? Is it to
oblige you? I thought that was against political
economy&mdash;and everything of that kind," she added
vaguely. It was not the subject Roland would have
chosen, but out of that, too, he could draw the
thread of talk.</p>

<p>"Political economy is not infallible," he said. "We
praise our wares so, and represent their excellence so
warmly, that there comes a moment when everybody
wishes to buy them. Sometimes they deserve the
commendations we bestow, sometimes they&mdash;don't.
But in either case people buy. And then political
economy comes in, and the demand being great<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_16" id="Page_16">[Pg 16]</a></span>
increases the value; so that sometimes we make a
nice little bit of profit without spending a penny."</p>

<p>Hester looked at him with a blank face. She
knew nothing about these mysteries. She shook
her head.</p>

<p>"I don't understand business," she said; "but how
can you buy without spending a penny? I wish
I knew how to do that."</p>

<p>"I should like to do it for you," said Roland, with
a look that said still more; for even stockbroking
will do as a vehicle for flirtation. "I should like to
buy you a quantity of Circassians, for instance, exactly
at the right moment, neither too soon nor too late,
and sell them next day, perhaps, when the market
had turned, and hand you over a thousand pounds or
two which you should have made without, as I said,
spending a penny. That would make the profession
romantic, poetic, if one could conduct such operations
for <i>you</i>. Probably I shall put that money into the
pocket of some bilious city person who does not want
it, instead of into your fair hands&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Which do. I don't know if they are fair hands,
but they want it certainly. A thousand or two!
enough to make people comfortable for life. And
what are Circassians?" Hester asked.</p>

<p>"They are stock. You must accept certain words
as symbols, or we shall never make it clear. And my
business is to watch the market for you, to catch the
moment when the tide is turning. There is a great
deal of excitement in it."</p>

<p>"And is that how Edward loses his head?"</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_17" id="Page_17">[Pg 17]</a></span></p>

<p>She spoke in a low tone, and Roland stopped
suddenly in what he was about to say, and turned
upon her with real surprise. After this he put on an
air of mock mortification&mdash;mock, yet not without
a mixture of the true.</p>

<p>"Is it for this," he said, "that I have been devising
delicate operations for you, and explaining all
my mysteries? to find you at the end not in the least
interested in my work or in your possible fortune,
but considering everything in the light of Edward
Vernon? Acknowledge that this is hard upon me."</p>

<p>"I was thinking only," said Hester, with again
that sudden flush of colour, "of what you said, that
Edward lost his head. It is not much wonder if
what you say can be. He would like to be rich; he
would like to be free. He would prefer to get a
fortune of his own, especially if it can be done that
way, rather than to wait for years and years, till he
has made money, or till Catherine dies. That is
generous, you know. He does not want to wait till
she dies, as if he grudged her life. It would be
terrible for her to think that he did not wish her to
live as long as she could. But at the same time he
wants, and so do we all, to be free."</p>

<p>"I am so much obliged to you for explaining
Edward Vernon's motives," said Roland, much
piqued. It was an experience he was not familiar
with, to have himself forgotten and his rival expounded
to him. His rival! was he his rival? In
the sting of this sudden revelation of preference,
Roland all but vowed that he would enter the lists<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_18" id="Page_18">[Pg 18]</a></span>
in earnest and chase this Edward, this country-fellow
whom she thought so much of, from the field.</p>

<p>Hester was confused, too, when her investigation
into her cousin's mind was thus received. It was
true enough; it was the problem which had interested
her in the first place&mdash;not directly Edward in
person who was the subject of it. She had tried to
explain his position to herself. Now that her
interest was found out, and she discovered it to
be an offence to her companion, she threw herself
back instinctively on a less alarming question.</p>

<p>"I think a great deal about Catherine," she
said.</p>

<p>"About Catherine&mdash;Cousin Catherine&mdash;whom I
thought you disliked with all your heart?"</p>

<p>"You may be astonished, but it is true. I think
a great deal about her. I think of her, after being
kind to everybody&mdash;for now that I am grown up I
begin to understand, she has been very kind to
everybody; not loving them, which takes the grace
out of it&mdash;but yet kind, after being so kind, to be left
alone with nobody caring for her, and perhaps the
one she loves best expecting when she will die.
No," said Hester, "I am glad Edward loses his head&mdash;that
is what he is thinking of. Not to wait or
feel as if he would like by an hour to shorten her
life, but only for himself, like a man, to get free. I
am very glad of it," she added hotly, with another
overwhelming blush, "for Catherine's sake."</p>

<p>Roland was bewildered and doubtful what to think,
for truth was so strong in Hester that it was hard to<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_19" id="Page_19">[Pg 19]</a></span>
believe she was sheltering herself behind a fiction.
But he was very much mortified too.</p>

<p>"I don't think," he said, plaintively, "that I want
to talk either of Cousin Catherine or of Mr. Edward,
whom she thinks a great deal more of than he
deserves&mdash;as, perhaps others do, too."</p>

<p>"And we have come on so fast and forgotten
Emma!" cried Hester, with a sense of guilt. "We
ought to go back and meet her. She has been a
long time getting that umbrella. Don't you think
you had better leave her with Mrs. Morgan a little
longer since she likes to be here?"</p>

<p>"I shall not disturb her if&mdash;you wish her to stay,"
he meant to say if she wishes to stay, but changed
his phrase and gave it emphasis, with a look of
devotion. "If I thought you had any regard for
my poor little sister how glad it would make me.
It would do her so much good; it would alter her
way of looking at things."</p>

<p>"Oh, you must not think," cried Hester, meaning,
like him, to say one thing and saying another, "that
Emma is likely to be influenced by me. She knows
what she thinks much better than I do&mdash;&mdash; Mr.
Ashton, would it not turn one's head and make one
unfit for one's other business if one was trying to
make money in <i>that</i> way?"</p>

<p>"Perhaps," Roland said.</p>

<p>"Has it not that effect upon you?"</p>

<p>"But it is my business. I don't act for myself.
I am tempted sometimes to do things I ought not to
do, and sometimes I fall. Even you, if you were<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_20" id="Page_20">[Pg 20]</a></span>
tempted, would sometimes fall. You would dabble
in Circassians, you would find a new company too
much for your virtue; shares going to-day for next
to nothing but sure to be at a premium next week&mdash;if
the bubble doesn't burst in the meantime."</p>

<p>"And does it always happen that the bubbles
burst?"</p>

<p>"Oh, not always; but after you have done with
them you don't care what becomes of them. I
never thought I should have had you for half an
hour all to myself, and talked of business the whole
time. It is incredible; and there is that little
Emma running this way as if she thought we were
inconsolable for the loss of her. I wanted to tell
you how much I have been thinking of all our talks
since I have been in my little house alone. Did you
never think of coming to London? The very feeling
of being in a place so full of life and action,
and thinking, makes your veins thrill. I think you
would like to be there. There is so much going on.
And then I might have the hope of seeing you
sometimes. That is one for you and two for
myself."</p>

<p>"We could not afford it," said Hester, colouring
again. "I think I should like it. I am not sure.
To look on and see everybody doing a great deal
would be intolerable if one had nothing to do."</p>

<p>"What are you talking of?" cried Emma coming
up breathless. "I couldn't find that umbrella. I
went up and down into every room in the house,
and then I found I had left it in your drawing-room,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_21" id="Page_21">[Pg 21]</a></span>
Hester, and your mamma looked up when I
went in, and said, 'Back already!' I think she
must have been dozing, for we could not possibly
have gone to Redborough and back in this time,
could we, Roland? You two looked so comfortable
by yourselves I had half a mind not to come at all:
for you know two's company but three's none. And
then I thought you didn't know my number, and
Roland would never have had the thought to bring
me my gloves. But don't be afraid, I dare say I
shall pick up some one on the way."</p>

<p>They walked into the town after this, and bought
Emma's gloves. Hester could not be tempted into
a similar purchase, nor could she be persuaded to
go to the Merridews. And she resisted all Roland's
attempts to make himself agreeable, even after
Emma encountered young Reginald Merridew, who
was glad enough to help her to buy her gloves.
Though it was not many months since she had seen
him, Hester felt that she had outgrown Roland.
His eyes were very fine, but they did not affect
her any more. He brought no light with him into
the problems of life, but only another difficulty,
which it was more and more hard to solve. A
sort of instinctive consciousness that something was
going to happen seemed in the air about her. All
was still, and everything going on in its calm
habitual way. There were not even any heavings
and groanings, like those that warn the surrounding
country before a volcano bursts forth. Nevertheless,
this girl, who had been so long a spectator,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_22" id="Page_22">[Pg 22]</a></span>
pushed aside from the action about her, but with
the keen sight of injured pride and wounded feeling,
seeing the secret thread of meaning that ran
through everything, felt premonitions, she could not
tell how, in the heated air, and through the
domestic calm.</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_23" id="Page_23">[Pg 23]</a></span></p>




<h2><a name="CHAPTER_II" id="CHAPTER_II">CHAPTER XXXII.</a></h2>

<h3>A SPECULATOR.</h3>


<p>Roland's Christmas visit to his friends was not
the holiday it appeared. His engagements with
them had been many during this interval, and
attended both by loss and gain; but the gain had
outbalanced the loss, and though there had been
many vicissitudes and a great many small crises, the
Christmas balance had shown tolerably well, and
every one was pleased. Edward's private ventures,
which he had not consulted any one about, but in
which the money of the bank had been more or less
involved, had followed the same course. He had a
larger sum standing to his individual credit than
ever before, and, so far as any one knew, had risked
nothing but what he had a right to risk, though, in
reality, his transactions had gone much further than
any one was aware of, even Ashton; for he had felt
the restraints of Roland's caution, and had already
established, though to a limited extent, dealings with
other agents of bolder disposition. And, indeed, his
mind had gone further than his practice, and had<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_24" id="Page_24">[Pg 24]</a></span>
reached a point of excitement at which the boundaries
of right and wrong become so indistinct as to
exert little, if any, control over either the conscience
or the imagination. Through his other channels of
information he had heard of a speculation greater
than he had yet ventured upon, in which the possible
gain would be immense, but the risk proportionate&mdash;almost
proportionate&mdash;though the probabilities were
so entirely in favour of success that a sanguine eye
could fix itself upon them with more justification
than is usual. It was so vast that even to Edward,
who had been playing with fire for months back,
the suggestion took away his breath, and he took
what was in reality the wise step of consulting
Ashton. It was wise had he intended seriously to
be guided by Ashton, but it was foolish as it happened,
seeing that a day or two's contemplation of
the matter wrought in him a determination to risk
it, whether Ashton approved or not. And Roland
did not approve. He came down at the utmost speed
of the express to stop any further mischief if he
could. He had himself always kept carefully within
the bounds of legitimate business; sometimes,
indeed, just skirting the edge, but never committing
himself or risking his credit deeply, and he had
never forgot the solemn adjuration addressed to him
by both the old people at the Vernonry. If
Catherine Vernon or her representatives came to
harm it should not be, he had determined, by his
means. So he had answered Edward's appeal in
person; and, instead of communicating with him<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_25" id="Page_25">[Pg 25]</a></span>
only, had spoken of the matter to Harry, supposing
him to be in all Edward's secrets, a thing which
disturbed Edward's composure greatly. It was his
own fault he felt for so distrusting his own judgment;
but he durst not betray his displeasure: and
so the proposal which he had meant to keep to
himself had to be discussed openly between the
partners. Harry, as may be supposed, being passive
and unambitious, opposed it with all his might.
Roland had been shut up with them in Edward's
room at the bank for hours in the morning, and the
discussion had run high. He had been a kind of
moderator between them, finding Harry's resistance
to some extent unnecessary, but, on the whole, feeling
more sympathy with him than with the other. "It
isn't ourselves only we have to consider," Harry said;
and he repeated this, perhaps too often, often enough
to give his opponent a sort of right to say that this
was a truism, and that they had heard it before.</p>

<p>"A thing does not become more true for being
repeated," Edward said.</p>

<p>"But it does not become less true," said Roland;
"and I think so far that Harry is right. With all
your responsibilities you ought to go more softly than
men who risk nothing that is not their own. You
are in something of the same position as trustees, and
you know how they are tied up."</p>

<p>"This is a statement which hardly comes well from
you," said Edward, "who have been our adviser all
along, and sailed very near the wind on some
occasions."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_26" id="Page_26">[Pg 26]</a></span></p>

<p>"I have never advised you to anything I did not
think safe," said Roland.</p>

<p>Edward was so eager and so confident of his
superiority over his cousin, that it was difficult to
keep the suspicion of a sneer out of his voice in this
discussion, though for Roland Ashton, whatever his
other sentiments might be, he at least had no feeling
of contempt.</p>

<p>"And there's Aunt Catherine," said Harry. "Of
course a great part of the money's hers. Her hair
would stand on end if she knew we were even
discussing such a question."</p>

<p>"Aunt Catherine is&mdash;all very well; but she's an
old woman. She may have understood business in
her day. I suppose she did, or things would not
have come to us in the state they are. But we
cannot permit ourselves to be kept in the old jogtrot
because of Aunt Catherine. She departed from her
father's rule, no doubt. One generation can't mould
itself upon another. At least that is not what I
understand by business."</p>

<p>"And there was John Vernon, don't you know,"
said Harry. "He was a caution! I shouldn't like
to follow in his ways."</p>

<p>"John Vernon was a fool; he threw his chance
away. I've gone into it, and I know that nothing
could be more idiotic. And his extravagance was
unbounded. He burned the candle at both ends.
I hope you don't think I want to take John Vernon
for my model."</p>

<p>"It seems to me," said Harry, "that it's awfully<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_27" id="Page_27">[Pg 27]</a></span>
easy to be ruined by speculation. Something always
happens to put you out. There were those mines.
For my part I thought they were as safe as the
bank, and we lost a lot by them. There was nobody
to blame so far as I know. I don't mean to
stand in the way, or be obstructive, as you call
it, but we have got to consider other people besides
ourselves."</p>

<p>Roland did not look upon the matter exactly in
this way. He was not of Harry's stolid temperament.
He heard of a proposition so important with
something of the feelings of a war-horse when he
sniffs the battle. But his opposition was all the
more weighty that it was more or less against his
own will.</p>

<p>"In your place I do not think I should venture,"
he said. "If I were an independent capitalist,
entirely free&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"You would go in for it without a moment's
hesitation! Of course you would. And why should
we be hampered by imaginary restrictions? Aunt
Catherine&mdash;if it is her you are thinking of&mdash;need
know nothing about it, and we risk nobody so much
as we risk ourselves. Loss would be far more fatal
to us than to any one else. Am I likely to insist
upon anything which would make an end of myself
first of all if it went wrong?"</p>

<p>But the others were not convinced by this argument.
Harry shook his head, and repeated his formula.</p>

<p>"It wouldn't console anybody who was injured,
that you ruined yourself first of all," he said.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_28" id="Page_28">[Pg 28]</a></span></p>

<p>"Nor would it comfort me for the loss of a fortune
that other people had rejected it," cried Edward
with an angry smile.</p>

<p>His mind worked a great deal faster than the
conversation could go, and the discussion altogether
was highly distasteful to him. Harry had a right to
his say when the subject was broached, but it was
beyond measure embarrassing and disagreeable that
Harry should have heard anything about it. It was
all Ashton's fault, whom he had consulted by way of
satisfying his conscience merely, and whom he could
not silence or find fault with for betraying him, since,
of course, he wanted no one to suppose that he acted
upon his own impulse and meant to leave Harry out.
He could not express all this, but he could drop the
discussion, and Ashton (he thought to himself) along
with it. Let him prose as he would, and chime in
with Harry's little matter-of-fact ways, he (Edward)
had no intention to allow himself to be stopped.</p>

<p>"I would let it alone, if I were you," Roland said.
"It is a great temptation, and of course if you were
entirely independent&mdash;&mdash; But I would not risk a
penny of other people's money."</p>

<p>"That's just what I say. We have others to
consider besides ourselves," said the steadfast Harry.</p>

<p>Edward made no reply. He was outvoted for the
moment by voices which, he said to himself, had no
right to be heard on the question. The best thing
was to end the discussion and judge for himself.
And the contemplation of the step before him took
away his breath; it took the words out of his mouth.<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_29" id="Page_29">[Pg 29]</a></span>
There would be nothing to be said for it. In argument
it would be an indefensible proceeding. It
was a thing to do, not to think, much less talk
about. No one would have a word to say if (as
was all but absolutely certain) his operations were
attended by success. In that event his coolness, his
promptitude, his daring, would be the admiration of
everybody; and Harry himself, the obstructive, would
share the advantage, and nothing more would be
heard of his stock phrase. Edward felt that in reality
it was he who was considering others, who was working
for everybody's benefit; but to form such a
determination was enough to make the strongest
head swim, and it was necessary that he should
shake off all intrusion, and have time and solitude
to think it over in private.</p>

<p>The way in which he thus dropped the discussion
astonished both the other parties to it a little.
Edward was seldom convinceable if he took an idea
into his head, and he never acknowledged himself
beaten. But Harry at first was simple enough to
be able to believe that what he had himself said was
unanswerable, and that as nothing could be done
without his acquiescence, Ned showed his sense by
dropping the question. Roland was not so easily
reassured; but it was not his business, which makes
a wonderful difference in the way we consider a
subject, and it was not for him to continue a subject
which the persons chiefly concerned had dropped.
He strolled with Harry into his room presently on a
hint from Edward that he had something particular<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_30" id="Page_30">[Pg 30]</a></span>
to do. Harry was not very busy. He did what
came under his special department with sufficient
diligence, but that was not oppressive work: the
clerks took it off his hands in great part. In all
important matters it was Mr. Edward who was first
consulted. Harry had rather a veto upon what was
proposed, than an active hand it; but he was very
steady, always present, setting the best example to
the clerks. Roland talked to him for a quarter of
an hour pleasantly enough about football, which
eased the minds which had been pondering speculation.
The result of the morning's conference was
shown in one way by his ready and unexpected
adherence to Mrs. John's statement that she liked
Harry best. Roland thought so too, but he did not
give any reason for it; and indeed, so far as intellectual
appreciation went, there was perhaps little
reason to give.</p>

<p>After Emma's gloves were bought, the group
sauntering through Redborough just at the hour
when all the fine people of the place were about,
were met in succession by the two cousins. Harry
had time only to pause for a minute or two, and talk
to the girls on his way to a meeting of the football
club, at which the matches of the season were to be
settled; but Edward, who was going their way,
walked with them as far as the Grange. He was
pale and preoccupied, with that fiery sparkle in his
eyes which told of some pressing subject for his
thoughts, and though those eyes shot forth a passing
gleam when he saw that Roland kept by Hester's<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_31" id="Page_31">[Pg 31]</a></span>
side, and that he was left to Emma, the arrangement
perhaps on the whole was the most suitable one that
could have been made, for Emma wanted little help
in keeping up something which sounded sufficiently
like conversation. Her voice flowed on, with just a
pause now and then for the little assenting ejaculations
which were indispensable. Edward said "Yes,"
sometimes with a mark of interrogation, sometimes
without; and "Indeed," and "To be sure," and
"Exactly," as we all do in similar circumstances;
and the pair got on very well. Emma thought him
much nicer than usual, and Hester going on in front,
somewhat distracted from Roland's remarks by the
consciousness of the other behind her, was perhaps
more satisfied to hear his stray monosyllables than
if he had maintained a more active part in the
conversation. When they stopped in front of the
Grange, where Catherine Vernon, always at the
window, saw the group approaching, they were called
up stairs to her by a servant&mdash;an invitation, however,
which Hester did not accept. "My mother
will be waiting for me," she said; and while the
others obeyed the summons, she sped along the
wintry road by herself, not without that proud sense
of loneliness and shut-out-ness which the circumstances
made natural. Edward lingered a moment
to speak to her while the others went in, having
first ascertained that they were shaded by the
big holly at the gate and invisible from the
window.</p>

<p>"I must not go with you, though I want to talk<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_32" id="Page_32">[Pg 32]</a></span>
to you," he said. "When will this bondage be over?
But at the Merridews to-night&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"I am not going," she said, waving her hand as
she went on.</p>

<p>She was half pleased, yet altogether angry,
despising him (almost) for his precautions, yet
glad that he wanted to talk to her, and glad also
to disappoint him, if it is possible to describe so
complicated a state of mind. She went along with
a proud, swift step, her head held high, her girlish
figure instinct in every line with opposition and
self-will: or so at least Catherine Vernon thought,
who looked after her with such attention that she
was unaware of the entrance of the others, whom
she liked so much better than Hester. She laughed
as she suffered herself to be kissed by Emma, who
was always effusive in that way, and fed upon the
cheeks of her friends.</p>

<p>"So Princess Hester has not come with you,"
Catherine said. "I suppose I should have gone
down to the door to meet her, as one crowned
head receives another."</p>

<p>"Oh, she had to go home to her mother," said
Emma, who never spoke ill of anybody, and always
took the most matter-of-fact view of her neighbours'
proceedings.</p>

<p>Catherine laughed, and was amused (she thought)
by the girl's persistent holding aloof.</p>

<p>"All the same a cup of tea would not have
poisoned her," she said.</p>

<p>When the Ashtons left the Grange it was nearly<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_33" id="Page_33">[Pg 33]</a></span>
the hour of dinner, and Catherine did not remark
the silence of her companion. Edward had been
moody of late; he had not been of temper so
equable, or of attentions so unfailing, as in the
earlier years. But she was a tolerant woman,
anxious not to exact too much, and ready to represent
to herself that this was but "a phase," and
that the happier intercourse would return after a
time. She wondered sometimes was he in love?
that question which occurs so unnaturally to the mind
at moments when things are not going perfectly
well with young persons, either male or female.
Catherine thought that if his choice were but a
good one, she would be very glad that he should
marry. It would give to him that sense of settledness
which nothing else gives, and it would give to
her a share in all the new events and emotions of
family life. If only he made a good choice! the
whole secret of the situation of course was in that.
At dinner he was more cheerful, indeed full of
animation, doing everything that could be done
to amuse and please her, but excused himself from
following her to the drawing-room afterwards.</p>

<p>"You are going to Ellen's folly, I suppose," she
said, which was the name that the Merridew
entertainments held in the house.</p>

<p>"Very likely&mdash;but later," said he; "I have a
great deal to do."</p>

<p>Catherine smiled upon his diligence, but held
up a finger in admonition.</p>

<p>"I never approved of bringing work home," she<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_34" id="Page_34">[Pg 34]</a></span>
said. "I would rather for my own part you stayed
an hour longer at the bank. Home should be for
rest, and you should keep the two places distinct;
but I suppose you must learn that by experience,"
she said, putting her hand caressingly upon his
shoulder as he held the door open for her: and she
looked back upon him when she had passed out
with a little wave of her hand. "Don't sit too
long over your papers," she said.</p>

<p>He had <i>trop de z&egrave;le</i>. No fear of Edward shrinking
from his work. But experience would teach him
that it was better to give himself a little leisure
sometimes. Would experience teach him? she
asked herself, as she went up stairs. He was of
a fervid nature, apt perhaps to go too far in anything
that interested him. She reflected that she
had herself been older before she began to have
anything to do with business, and a woman looks
forward to home, to the seat by the fire, the novel,
the newspaper (if there is nothing better), the
domestic chat when that is to be had, with more
zest than a man does. What she herself liked would
have been to have him there opposite to her as he
used to be at first, talking, or reading as pleased him,
telling her his ideas. Why was it that this pleasant
state of affairs never continued? He preferred to
sit in the library now, to work, or perhaps only,
she began to fear, to be alone. The idea struck
Catherine sadly now she came to think of it. There
was a great difference. Why should men prefer to
sit alone, to abandon that domestic hearth which<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_35" id="Page_35">[Pg 35]</a></span>
sounds so well in print, and which from Cowper
downward all the writers have celebrated. Even
Dickens (then the master of every heart) made it
appear delightful and attractive to everybody. And
yet the young man preferred to go and sit alone.
A wife would alter all that, provided only that the
choice he made was a good one, Catherine Vernon
said. The drawing-room was a model of comfort;
its furniture was not in the taste of the present day,
but the carpets were like moss into which the foot
sank, and the curtains were close drawn in warm,
ruddy, silken folds. The fire burnt brightly, reflected
from the brass and steel, which it cost so
much work to keep in perfect order. Catherine
sat in the warmest place just out of reach of the
glare, with a little table by her favourite easy-chair.
Impossible to find a room more entirely "the picture
of comfort" as people say. And few companions
could have been found more intelligent, more ready
to understand every allusion, and follow every suggestion,
than this old lady, who was not at all
conscious of being old. Yet her boy, her son, her
nephew, her chosen, whom she had taken to her
heart in place of all the other inmates who once
dwelt there, sat down stairs! How strange it was;
yet notwithstanding Catherine deposited herself in
her seat by the fire, with a sort of subdued happiness,
consequent on the fact that he was down stairs.
This gave a secondary satisfaction if nothing better
was to be had. It is all that many people have to
live upon. But if he had a wife that would make<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_36" id="Page_36">[Pg 36]</a></span>
all the difference. A wife he could not leave to sit
alone; provided only that his choice was a right
one! If Catherine had known that his choice,
so far as he had made a choice, had fallen upon
Hester, what would her sentiments have been? but
fortunately she did not know.</p>

<p>But if she could have looked into the library down
stairs, which had been given up to Edward as his
room, what would she have seen there? The sight
would have driven out of her mind all question about
a problematical wife: though indeed Edward always
prepared for domiciliary visitations, and believing
them to be the fruit of suspicion, not of love, was
ready in that case to have concealed his occupation
at the first sound of the door opening. He had an
open drawer close to him into which his materials
could have been thrown in a minute. He took these
precautions because, as has been said, Catherine
would sometimes carry him with her own hands a
cup of tea in affectionate kindness, and he thought it
was inquisitiveness to see what he was doing! She
had not done this now for a long time, but still he
was prepared against intrusion. The papers he was
examining he had brought himself in a black bag
from the safe in the bank. He had locked the black
bag into an old oak escritoire till after dinner. He
was looking over them now with the greatest care,
and a face full of suppressed, but almost solemn
excitement. They were securities of all kinds, and
meant an amount of money which went to Edward's
head even more than the chances of fortune. All<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_37" id="Page_37">[Pg 37]</a></span>
that in his power; no chance of being called upon to
produce them, or to render an account of the stewardship
which had been so freely committed to him! It
was enough to make any man's head go round. To
hesitate upon a speculation which might bring in
cent. per cent. when he had all these to fall back
upon, papers upon which he could easily find, to
meet a temporary need, any amount of money! and
of course no such need could be anything but temporary!
Edward was as little disposed to risk the
future of the bank as any one. He had wisdom
enough to know that it was his own sheet anchor, as
well as that of the family, and he had a pride in its
stability and high reputation, as they all had. That
Vernon's should be as safe as the Bank of England
was a family proverb which admitted of no doubt.
But why should Vernon's be affected except to its
advantage by really bold speculation? It was the
timid, half-hearted sort of operations that frittered
away both money and credit, which ruined people,
not anything which was really on a grand scale.
Edward represented to himself that ventures of this
great kind were rarely unsuccessful. There was a
security in their magnitude&mdash;small people could not
venture upon them; and what even if it did not succeed?
It blanched his countenance and caught his
breath to think of this, but (he said to himself) every
possibility, even the most unlikely, must be taken
into account. If it did not, here was what would
keep the credit of the bank scatheless until another
luckier stroke should make up for failure. For in<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_38" id="Page_38">[Pg 38]</a></span>
such pursuits the last word was never said. Could
you but go on you were sure one time or another to
satisfy your fullest desires. This was the worst in
case of failure: but there was in reality no chance of
failure, every human probability was in favour of a
great, an almost overwhelming success.</p>

<p>There was almost a sense of triumph, though the
thrill of excitement had alarm in it also&mdash;in the
final calculations by which he made up his mind to
throw Ashton and prudence to the winds. He wrote
with a heart leaping high in his breast to the
other broker, whom he had already employed, before
he rose from his writing table. Ashton was a fool&mdash;he
would lose a large commission, and make nothing
by his preachment; and to think of that preachment
made Edward smile, though the smile was constrained
and dry&mdash;not a cheerful performance. Harry and
Ashton&mdash;they were a sensible couple to lecture him
as to what was best! It seemed to Edward that he
had himself far more insight and faculty than a dozen
such. Ashton indeed might know a thing or two.
He had proved himself a fool in this case, but
naturally he was not a fool. Advice might be received
from him, but dictation, never. And as for
Harry with his football, a ninny who had never been
trusted with any but the mechanical working of the
bank, it was too ridiculous that Harry should take
upon himself to advise. Edward got his letter ready
for the post with something of the feeling with which
a conspirator may be supposed to light the match by
which some deadly mine is to be fired. It may blow<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_39" id="Page_39">[Pg 39]</a></span>
himself into atoms if he lingers, and the strong
sensation of the possibility is upon him even though
he knows it cannot happen except by some extraordinary
accident. Edward put the letter where he
knew the butler would find it, and send it away for
the late post. It would thus be out of his power to
recall, even though a panic should seize him. When
he had done this, he felt an overwhelming need of
the fresh air and movement to calm his nerves and
distract his thoughts. Should he go to Ellen's folly
as was his custom? He put on his coat and went
out, forgetting that it was his usual custom to go up
stairs and say good-night to Catherine before doing
so. There was no intentional neglect in this, but
only the intensity of his abstraction and self-absorbedness.
When he got out the cold breeze in his face was
pleasant to him, brain and all. Then he remembered
that Hester had said she would not go to the Merridews,
and obeying his impulse without questioning
what he expected from it, he turned away from the
lights of the town, and took his way along the moonlit
road towards the Vernonry. He did not expect
to see her&mdash;he expected nothing in particular; but
his thoughts, his heart, drew him in that direction&mdash;or
his fancy, if nothing more.</p>

<p>Catherine, in the warmth and lonely luxury of
her drawing-room, heard the door shut, and wondered,
with a new little arrow of pain going into
her heart&mdash;Was it possible that he could have gone
out without saying good-night? She was like a
mother who is beginning to discover that she is of<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_40" id="Page_40">[Pg 40]</a></span>
no particular consequence in the economy of her
child's life. When you seize upon the office of
parent without being called to it by God, you must
accept the pains as well as the pleasures. This new
step in the severance between them hurt her more
than she could have thought possible; the merest
trifle! He might have forgotten; it might be fully
accounted for&mdash;and, if not, what did it matter? It
was nothing; but she stole behind the heavy curtains,
and looked out at the corner of the blind with
a wistful anxiety to see him, as if the sight of
him would afford any comfort. Had Edward seen
it he would have gnashed his teeth at her inquisition,
at her watch and surveillance, without a
thought of the trembling of profound tenderness,
surprise, and pain which was in her. But Catherine
was too late to see him. He had got into the
shadow of the great holly, and there paused a
moment before he turned his back upon Redborough
and the dance. She saw a solitary figure on the
road in the opposite direction, and wondered vaguely
who it could be at that hour, but that was all.
That it should be Edward did not enter into her
thoughts.</p>

<p>But to Edward the silence and stillness were very
grateful, emerging out of the very heat and din of
conflict as he had just done. The cold too did him
good; it refreshed his weary mind and excited brain,
and composed and stilled the ferment in his whole
being. The vast darkness of the world about him,
the broad white light of the moon streaming along<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_41" id="Page_41">[Pg 41]</a></span>
the road, but retiring baffled from the inequalities
of the common; the spectral outline of every object,
enlarged by the blackness behind of its own shadow&mdash;all
had a vague effect upon him, though he made
but little account of the features of the scene. He
was in a state of mental exaltation, and therefore
more open than usual to all influences, though it
was not any lofty or noble cause which raised him
into that spiritual susceptibility. He could see a
long way before he reached it, the end window of
Mrs. John's house shining along the road, its little
light looking like a faint little ruddy earth-star, so
near the ground. The mother and daughter were
still sitting over their fire, talking&mdash;or rather it was
the mother who talked, while Hester sat with her
hands in her lap, half-listening, half-thinking, her
mind escaping from her into many a dream and
speculation, even while she gave a certain attention
to her mother's broken monologue, which was chiefly
about the dances and parties of the past.</p>

<p>"I never refused a ball when I was your age,"
Mrs. John said. "It would have been thought quite
unnatural; and though I am old now, I feel the
same as ever. What can be nicer for a girl than to
have a nice dance to go to, when she is sure of
plenty of partners? If it was in a strange place, or
you did not know the people, I could understand.
It did hurt me a little, I confess, to hear that little
Emma, with her white eyes, rolling away like a
princess, to get all the attention, while my girl,
that had so much better a right, stayed at home."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_42" id="Page_42">[Pg 42]</a></span></p>

<p>"Never mind, mamma," said Hester, with a smile.
"It was my own fault; there was no wicked stepmother
in question. And even if there had been,
you know, after all, it was Cinderella that got the
prince."</p>

<p>"Stepmother!" cried Mrs. John. "My dear!
my dear! how could you have had a stepmother,
and me surviving your poor dear papa all these
years? I dare say if it had been me that died you
would have had a stepmother, for gentlemen don't
think of second marriages as women do. However,
as it could not have happened, we need not think of
that. Don't you hear steps on the road? I could
be almost certain that I heard some one pass the
window about five minutes ago; and there it is
again. Can there be anything wrong with the
Captain or old Mrs. Morgan? Dear me! what a
dreadful thing if they should be taken ill, and
nobody to send for the doctor! Listen! it is
coming back again. If it was some one going for
the doctor, they would not walk back and forward
like that under our window. I declare I begin to
get quite frightened. What do you think it can be?"</p>

<p>"If you think they may be ill I will run round
directly," said Hester, rising to her feet.</p>

<p>"But, my darling! it might be robbers, and not
Captain Morgan at all."</p>

<p>"I am not afraid of robbers," said Hester, which
perhaps was not exactly true. "Besides, robbers
don't make a noise to scare you. I must go and see
if there is anything wrong."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_43" id="Page_43">[Pg 43]</a></span></p>

<p>Mrs. John did all she could at once to arouse her
daughter to anxiety about the old people, and to
persuade her that it was dangerous to run round the
corner at nearly eleven o'clock. But eventually she
consented to let Hester venture, she herself accompanying
her with a candle to the door.</p>

<p>"It will be far better, mamma," Hester said, "if
you will stand at the parlour window, and let me
feel there is some one there."</p>

<p>This Mrs. John, though with much trembling, at
length agreed to do. She even opened the window
a little, though very cautiously, that nobody might
hear, reflecting that if it was a robber he might jump
in before she could get it closed again. And her
anxiety rose almost to the fever point in the moments
that followed. For Hester did not pass the window
on her way to the Morgans' door. On the contrary,
Mrs. John heard voices in the direction of the gate
of the Heronry, and venturing to peep out, saw two
dark figures in the moonlight&mdash;a sight which alarmed
her beyond expression. It was nearly eleven o'clock,
and all the inmates of the Heronry were in bed or
going to it. Was it really robbers?&mdash;and why was
Hester parleying with them?&mdash;or were these two of
the robbers, and had they made away with her child?
She was so alarmed at last that she hurried to the
door, carrying her candle, and went out into the
cold without a shawl, shading the light with her
hand, and looking wildly about her. The candle and
the moonlight confused each other, and though her
heart beat less loudly when she perceived it was<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_44" id="Page_44">[Pg 44]</a></span>
Hester who was talking across the gate, yet the sense
of the unusual filled her with horror. "Who is it?"
she cried, though in a whisper. "Hester! oh, what
is the matter? Is it a doctor? Who is it? Is there
anything wrong?"</p>

<p>"It is Edward Vernon; may he come in?" Hester
said.</p>

<p>"Then it is Catherine that is ill," cried Mrs. John.
"Oh, I knew something must be going to happen to
her, for I dreamt of her all last night, and I have not
been able to think of anything else all day. Surely
he may come in. What is it, Edward? Oh, I hope
not paralysis, or anything of that kind."</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_45" id="Page_45">[Pg 45]</a></span></p>




<h2><a name="CHAPTER_III" id="CHAPTER_III">CHAPTER XXXIII.</a></h2>

<h3>A LATE VISITOR.</h3>


<p>He was not a frequent visitor: indeed it is doubtful
whether, save for a visit of ceremony, he had
ever been there before. As it was so near bedtime
the fire was low, and the two candles on the table
gave very little light in the dark wainscoted room.
Outside it had seemed a ruddy little star of domestic
comfort, but within the prospect was less cheerful.
They had been preparing to go to bed. Mrs. John's
work was carefully folded and put away, even the
little litter of thimbles and thread on the table had
been "tidied," as her usage was. A book lying
open, which was Hester's, was the only trace of
occupation, and the dark walls seemed to quench
and repel the little light, except in some polished
projection here and there where there was a sort of
reflection. Mrs. John hastily lit the two candles on
the mantelpiece which were always ready "in case
any one should come in," and which mirrored themselves
with a sort of astonishment in the little glass
against which they stood. She was eager to be
hospitable, although she had a somewhat warm<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_46" id="Page_46">[Pg 46]</a></span>
realisation of Edward as on the other side: perhaps,
indeed, this of itself made her more anxious to show
him "every attention," as a sort of magnanimous
way of showing that she bore no malice.</p>

<p>"It is rather too late to offer you tea," she said,
"but perhaps a glass of wine, Hester&mdash;for it is a
cold night and your cousin has had a long walk.
I am very much relieved to hear that Catherine is
quite well. For the first moment I confess I was
very much alarmed: for she has used her head a
great deal, and people say that paralysis&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"I don't think she is at all a subject for that: her
nerves are in perfect order," Edward said.</p>

<p>"That is a great thing to say for the strongest of
us," said Mrs. John, sitting down in her chair again
and furtively drawing her shawl round her; for he
could not surely mean to stay long at that hour, and
it seemed a pity to put more coals on the fire;
"nerves is the weak point with most ladies. I know
to be sure that Catherine is a very remarkable person,
and not at all like the ordinary run. She has a
masculine mind I have always heard. You are like
Hester, you are not at the ball to-night&mdash;but you go
generally, I hope?"</p>

<p>"I go sometimes; there was no particular attraction
to-night," said Edward.</p>

<p>He saw that Hester understood, and that the ready
colour rose to her face. How he longed to take the
little tedious mother by the shoulders and send her
up stairs! A sort of longing for sympathy, for some
one to share his second and hidden life with him<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_47" id="Page_47">[Pg 47]</a></span>
had seized upon him. He could not have told her
all, even if he could have got Hester to himself, but
he would have told her something, enough to keep
the too full cup from running over. But Mrs. John
settled herself as comfortably as she could in her
chair. She tried to keep awake and make conversation.
She would not allow one of the opposite
side to suppose that she was wanting in courtesy.
Hester sat down in the background and said nothing.
She did not share Edward's faith that her mother
would soon be tired out and leave them to themselves,
but it was impossible that she should not to
some extent share his excitement of suspense and
be anxious to know what he had to say.</p>

<p>"I like young men to go to balls," Mrs. John
said; "where could they be so well as amusing
themselves among their own kind of people? and
though perhaps Ellen may be a little silly,
you know, I am sure she means well. That is what
I always say to Hester. Young people are apt to
judge severely, but Ellen always meant well. She
might promise too much now and then, but so do
we all. It is so easy to make yourself agreeable by
just saying what will please; but then sometimes
it is very difficult to carry it out."</p>

<p>"Nothing could be more true," said Edward, with
a little bow.</p>

<p>"Yes, it is very true," continued Mrs. John. "It
seems all so easy at the moment: but afterwards
you have to take into consideration whether it is
suitable or not, and whether the person is just the<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_48" id="Page_48">[Pg 48]</a></span>
right kind, and to make everything fit: and all that
is so difficult." Then there was a little pause, and
Mrs. John began to feel very sleepy. "Do you often&mdash;take
a walk&mdash;so late?" she said. "Oh, I know
some gentlemen do. Hester's poor papa; but then
there was the club&mdash;I used always to think it was
the club&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Indeed I ought to apologise for venturing to
ask admission at such an hour," said Edward. "I
should not have taken it upon me had not Hester
come out to the gate."</p>

<p>"Oh, that does not matter a bit," said Mrs. John,
waving her hand. She could scarcely keep her eyes
open. After eleven o'clock&mdash;for the hour had struck
since he came in&mdash;Catherine ought to have had "a
stroke" at least to justify such a late visit. "You are
sure you are not keeping anything from us about
poor dear Catherine?" she said anxiously. "Oh, I
think it is always better if there is any misfortune
to say it out at once."</p>

<p>Thus the conversation, if conversation it could be
called, went on for some time. Hester did not say
a word. She sat a little behind them, looking at
them, herself in a state of growing impatience and
suspense. What could he have to say that made
him come at such an hour&mdash;and was it possible that
he ever could get it said? There went on for some
time longer an interchange of hesitating remarks.
Mrs. John got more and more sleepy. Her eyes
closed in spite of herself when Edward spoke. She
opened them again widely when his voice stopped,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_49" id="Page_49">[Pg 49]</a></span>
and smiled and said something which was generally
wide of the mark. At last Hester rose and came
to the back of her chair and stooped over her.</p>

<p>"Mamma, you are very tired, don't you think you
had better go to bed?"</p>

<p>"I hope&mdash;" cried Edward, "I fear that my ill-timed
visit&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Not for the world, dear," said Mrs. John in an
undertone: "no doubt he'll be going presently.
Oh no, you must not think anything of the sort&mdash;we
often sit up much&mdash;later than this&mdash;" and she
sat very upright in her chair and opened her eyes
wide, determined to do her duty at all hazards.
Then Edward rose, and looked at Hester with an
entreaty which she could not resist. She was so
anxious too to know what he wanted.</p>

<p>"Don't come out, mother; I will open the door
for Edward," she said.</p>

<p>"But you don't know the right turn of the key.
Well then, perhaps&mdash;if your cousin will excuse me&mdash;but
be sure you lock the door right. It is a difficult
door. Put the key in as far as it will go&mdash;and then
turn it to the right. Let me see, is it the right?
I know it is the wrong way, not the way you
generally turn a key. Well then, good-night. I
hope you don't think it very uncivil of me to leave
you to Hester," Mrs. John said, shaking hands, with
that extremely wide-awake look which sleepy
persons put on.</p>

<p>Edward went out into the dark passages, following
Hester and her candle with a sense of something<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_50" id="Page_50">[Pg 50]</a></span>
that must be said to her now. He had not thought
of this when he set out. Then he had been merely
excited, glad of the relief of the air and silence,
scarcely aware that he wanted to pour out his soul into
the bosom of some one who would understand him,
of her who alone he thought could be trusted fully.
But the obstacles, the hindrances, had developed
this longing. Why should he have made so inappropriate
a visit except under the stimulus of having
something to say? And she, too, was now expecting
breathlessly, something which he must have to
say. When she set down her candle and opened
the door into the verandah, she turned round instinctively
to hear what it was. The white moon
shone down straight through the glass roof,
throwing black shadows of all the wintry plants in
the pots, and of the two who stood curiously
foreshortened by the light above them. She
did not ask anything, but her whole attitude was
a question. He took both her hands in his
hands.</p>

<p>"It is nothing," he said, "that is, I don't know
what there is to tell you. I had come to a conclusion,
after a great deal of thought. I had settled to
begin in a new way, and I felt that I must talk it
over, that I couldn't keep silent; and there is no
one I could speak to with freedom but you."</p>

<p>She did not withdraw her hands, or show any
surprise at his confidence; but only whispered
"What is it, Edward?" breathlessly, with all the
excitement that had been gathering in her.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_51" id="Page_51">[Pg 51]</a></span></p>

<p>"I don't know how I can tell you," he said; "it is
only business. If I were to go into details you
wouldn't understand. It is only that I've made up
my mind to a new course of action. I am burning
my ships, Hester. I must get rid of this shut-up life
somehow. I have gone in to win&mdash;a great fortune&mdash;or
to lose&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Edward!" she said, with an unconscious pressure
of his hands. "Tell me&mdash;I think I could
understand."</p>

<p>"So long as you feel with me, that is all I want,"
he said. "I feel better now that I have told you.
We shall make our fortune, dear, or&mdash;but there is no
or&mdash;we must succeed. I know we shall; and then,
Hester, my only love&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>He drew close to her, and kissed her in his excitement,
straining her hands. It was not a love-kiss,
but the expression of that agitation which was in his
veins. She drew back from him in astonishment,
but not in anger, understanding it so.</p>

<p>"What is it? To win a great fortune, or&mdash;to lose&mdash;what?
Edward, you are not risking&mdash;other
people?" she said.</p>

<p>"Pshaw!" he said, almost turning away from her.
Then, next moment, "Never mind other people,
Hester. That will come all right. I hope you don't
think I am a fool. I have made a new departure,
that is all, and with everything in my favour. Wish
me good luck, and keep my secret. It seemed too
big for me to keep all by myself. Now that I have
put half of it upon you I shall be able to sleep."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_52" id="Page_52">[Pg 52]</a></span></p>

<p>"But you have not told me anything," she
said.</p>

<p>Upon which he laughed a little, in an agitated
way, and said&mdash;</p>

<p>"Perhaps that is all the better. You know everything,
and yet you know nothing. I have been kept
in long enough, and done as other people would, not
as I wished myself; and now that is over. There is
no one in the world to whom I would say so much,
but you."</p>

<p>Hester was pleased and touched to the bottom of
her heart.</p>

<p>"Oh, if I could only help you!" she cried; "if I
could do anything, or if you would tell me more! I
know I could understand. But anyhow, if it is a
relief to you to tell me just as much as that; I am
glad! only if I could but help you&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"At present no one could help; it is fortune that
must decide."</p>

<p>"You mean Providence," said Hester, softly. She
had never used the phraseology of religious sentiment
as many girls do at her age, and was very shy in
respect to it. But she added, under her breath,
"And one can always pray."</p>

<p>At this Edward, which was a sign of grace in him,
though she did not know it as such, drew back with
a hasty movement. It gave him a strange sensation
to think of the success which he was seeking by such
means being prayed for, as if it had been a holy
enterprise. But just then Mrs. John stirred audibly
within, as if about to come and inquire into the<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_53" id="Page_53">[Pg 53]</a></span>
causes of the delay. He kissed her again tenderly,
without any resistance on her part, and said&mdash;</p>

<p>"Good-night&mdash;good-night! I must not say any
more."</p>

<p>Hester opened the outer door for him, letting in
the cold night air. It was a glorious night, still as
only winter is, the moonlight filling up everything.
She stood for a moment looking after him, as he
crossed the threshold. When he had made a few
steps into the night, he came back again hastily, and
caught her hands once more.</p>

<p>"Hester, we win or lose. Will you come away
with me? Will you give up all this for me? You
don't love it any more than I do. Will you come with
me and be free?"</p>

<p>"Edward, you don't think what you are saying.
You forget my mother," she said.</p>

<p>He gave an impatient stamp with his foot; contradiction
was intolerable to him, or any objection
at this moment. Then he called "Good-night,"
again, more loudly into the air, as though to reach
Mrs. John in the parlour, and hurried away.</p>

<p>"Edward was a long time saying good-night,"
said Mrs. John. "I suppose you were talking about
the ball; that is always what happens when you
give up a thing for a whim; you always regret it
after. Of course you would both have preferred to
be there. I suppose that is why he came in this
evening, a thing he never did in his life before.
Well, I must say we are all indebted, more or less, to
Ellen Merridew, Hester. She has drawn us together<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_54" id="Page_54">[Pg 54]</a></span>
in a way there never was any chance of in the old
times. Fancy Edward Vernon coming into our
house in that sort of unceremonious way! It was too
late. I would never encourage a gentleman to come
so late: but still it showed a friendly spirit, and a
confidence that he would be welcome, which is
always nice. I must tell him next time I see him
that I shall be delighted at any time to have him
here, only not quite so late at night."</p>

<p>"I dare say it will not happen again," Hester said.</p>

<p>"Why shouldn't it happen again? It is the most
natural thing in the world; only I shall tell him
that usually we are all shut up by ten o'clock. It
did give me a great fright to begin with, for I
thought he must have come to tell us that Catherine
was ill. She has always been so strong and well
that I shouldn't wonder at all if it was something
sudden that carried her off in the end; and whenever
it does come it will be a great shock; besides that, it
will break up everything. This house will probably
be sold, and&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Catherine Vernon does not look at all like
dying," Hester said. "Please do not calculate upon
what would happen."</p>

<p>"My dear, it does not make a thing happen a day
the sooner that we take it into consideration; for we
will have to, when the time comes. We shall all
have to leave our houses, and it will make a great
deal of difference. Of course we can't expect her
heirs to do the same kind of thing as Catherine has
done. No, I confess that was what I thought, and it<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_55" id="Page_55">[Pg 55]</a></span>
was a great relief to me to hear&mdash;did you lock the
door, Hester? I hope you remembered to turn the
key the wrong way. The fire is quite safe, I think,
and I have shut the shutters. Carry the candle and
let us go to bed."</p>

<p>Mrs. John continued to talk while they were undressing,
though she had been so sleepy during
Edward's visit. She would permit no hasty manipulation
of Hester's hair, which had to be brushed
for twenty minutes every night. She thought its
beauty depended upon this manipulation, and never
allowed it to be omitted, and as this peaceful exercise
was gone through, and her mother's gentle commentary
ran on, it is impossible to describe the force of
repressed thought and desire for silence and quiet
which was in Hester's veins. She answered at
random when it was necessary to answer at all, but
Mrs. John took no notice. She had been roused up
by that curious visit. She took longer time than
usual for all her own little preparations, and was
more particular than usual about the hair-brushing.
The fire was cheerful in the outer room, which was
the mother's, and on account of this fire it was the
invariable custom that Hester should do her hair-brushing
there. Her mother even tried a new way
of arranging Hester's hair, so full was she of that
mental activity which so often adds to the pangs of
those who are going through a secret crisis. It
seemed hours before the girl was finally allowed to
put out the candle, and steal back into the cold
moonlight, into her own little room where the door<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_56" id="Page_56">[Pg 56]</a></span>
always stood open between her and her mother.
Hester would have liked to close that door; her
thoughts seemed too big, too tumultuous, not to
betray themselves. Soon, however, Mrs. John's calm,
regular breathing, showed her to be asleep, and then
Hester felt free to deliver herself up to that torrent
of thought.</p>

<p>Was it possible that not very long since she had
scorned herself for almost sharing Emma's ignoble
anxiety that he should "speak." It had chafed and
fretted her almost beyond endurance to feel herself
thus on the same level as Emma, obliged to wait till
he should declare his wishes, feeling herself so far
subordinate and dependent, an attitude which her
pride could not endure. Now he had spoken indeed&mdash;not
in the conventional way, saying he loved her
and asking her to marry him, as people did in books.
Edward had taken it for granted that she was well
aware of his love&mdash;how could it be otherwise? Had
not she known from the beginning, when their eyes
met, that there was an interchange in that glance
different from and more intimate than all the intercourse
she had ever had with others? Even when
she had been so angry with him, when he had passed
by her in Catherine Vernon's parties with but that
look, indignant as she had been, was there not something
said and replied to by their eyes such as had
never passed between her and any other all her life
long?&mdash;"My only love." She knew she was his
only love. The remembrance of the words made her
heart beat, but she felt now that she had known them<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_57" id="Page_57">[Pg 57]</a></span>
all along. Since the first day when they met on the
common, she a child, he in the placidity of unawakened
life, there had been nobody to each but the
other. She knew and felt it clearly now&mdash;she had
known it and felt it all along, she said to herself&mdash;but
it had wanted that word to make it flash into
the light. And how unlike ordinary love-making it
all was! He had come to her, not out of any stupid
doubt about her response to him, not with any intention
of pleading his own cause, but only because
his burden was too much for him, his heart too full,
and she was the only one in all the world upon whom
to lean it. Hester said to herself, with fine scorn,
that to suppose the question, "Do you love me?" to
be foremost in a man's mind when he was fully immersed
in the business and anxieties of life, was to
make of love not a great but a petty thing. How
could he fail to know that as he had looked upon her
all those years so she had looked upon him? "My
only love"&mdash;the words were delightful, like music to
her ears; but still more musical was the thought
that he had come to her not to say them&mdash;that he
had come to lean upon her, upon her arm, and her
heart&mdash;to tell her that something had happened to
him which he could not tell to any one else in the
world. To think that he should have been drawn
out of his home, along the wintry road, out into the
night, solely on the hope of seeing her and reposing
his over-full mind upon her, conveyed to Hester's
soul a proud happiness, a sense of noble befittingness
and right, which was above all the usual pleasure<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_58" id="Page_58">[Pg 58]</a></span>
(she thought) of a newly disclosed love. He had
disclosed it in the noblest way, by knowing that it
needed no disclosure, by coming to her as the other
part of him when he was in utmost need. Had
Edward calculated deeply the way to move her he
could not have chosen better; but he did it instinctively,
which was better still&mdash;truly needing, as he
said, that outlet which only the most intimate unity
of being, the closest of human connections, could
give. Hester could think of nothing but this in the
first rapture. There were other things to be taken
into consideration&mdash;what the momentous step was
which he had taken, and what was the meaning of
that wild proposal at the end. To go away with him,
win or lose&mdash;&mdash; She would not spoil the first sweet
impression with any thought of these, but dropped
asleep at last, saying to herself "My only love" with
a thrill of happiness beyond all words. She had
believed she would not sleep at all, so overflowing
was her mind with subjects of thought, but these
words were a sort of lullaby which put the other
more important matters out of her head. "My only
love"&mdash;if it was he who had said them, or she who
had said them, she could scarcely tell. They expressed
everything&mdash;the meaning of so many silent
years.</p>

<p>Edward was making his way as quietly as possible
into the house which had been his home for so
many years, while Hester turned over these things
in her mind. He had loitered on the way back,
saying to himself that if Catherine should chance<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_59" id="Page_59">[Pg 59]</a></span>
not to be asleep, it was better that she should
suppose him to have gone to the Merridews. He
felt himself something like a thief in the night as
he went in, taking his candle and going softly up
the carpeted stairs not to disturb her&mdash;a proceeding
which was for his sake, not for hers, for he had no
desire to be questioned in the morning and forced to
tell petty lies, a thing he disliked, not so much for
the sake of the lies as for the pettiness of them.
But Catherine, disturbed by a new anxiety which
she did not understand, was lying awake, and did
hear him, cautious as he was. She said to herself,
"He has not stayed long to-night," with a sense
half of satisfaction, half of alarm. Never before
during all the years he had been under her roof had
this feeling of insecurity been in her mind before.
She did not understand it, and tried to put it aside
and take herself to task for a feeling which did
Edward injustice, good as he was, and had always
been, in his relations with her. If some youthful
tumult was in his mind, unsettling him, there was
nothing extraordinary in that&mdash;if he was "in love,"
that natural solution of youthful agitations. It is
common to say and think that mothers, and those
who stand in a mother's place, are jealous of a new comer,
and object to be no longer the first in their
child's affections. Catherine smiled in the dark, as
she lay watching and thinking. This should not
stand in Edward's way&mdash;provided that he made a
right choice! But whatever choice he made, it
would be for him, not her, she reflected, with a<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_60" id="Page_60">[Pg 60]</a></span>
magnanimity almost beyond nature, and it would
be strange if she could not put up with it for his
sake. She had not, indeed, the smallest idea in
which direction his thoughts had turned. But
there was something in the air which communicated
alarm.</p>

<p>When Hester woke next morning, it was not with
the same sense of beatitude which had rapt her
from all other considerations on the previous night,
notwithstanding her high certainty that the mere
love declared was but secondary in her mind to the
noble necessity of having to share the burdens and
bear part in the anxieties of her lover. Everything
else he said had, in fact, been little to her in
comparison with the three words which had been
going through her mind and her dreams the whole
night, and which sprang to her lips in the morning
like an exquisite refrain of happiness, but which
gradually, as she began to think, went back out of
the foreground, leaving her subject to questions and
thoughts of a very different description. What had
the crisis been through which he had passed? What
was the new departure, the burning of the ships?
There must be some serious meaning in words so
serious as these. And then that wild suggestion
that she should fly with him, whether they gained
or lost, "away from all this; you don't love it any
more than I do"&mdash;what did that mean? Alarm was
in her mind along with the excitement of a secret
half-revealed. An eager and breathless longing to
see him again, to know what it meant, gained<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_61" id="Page_61">[Pg 61]</a></span>
possession of her mind. Then there floated back
into her ears Roland's remark, which had half-offended
her at the time, which she had thought
unnecessary, almost impertinent, that Edward "lost
his head." In what did he lose his head? She
remembered the whole conversation as her mind
went back to it. Edward was too hot and eager;
he had a keen eye, but he lost his head; he was
tired of the monotony of his present life. And
then there came his own statement about burning
his ships. What did it all mean? She began to
piece everything together, dimly, as she could with
her imperfect knowledge. She had no training in
business, and did not know in what way he could
risk in order to gain&mdash;though of course this was a
commonplace, and she had often heard before of
men who had lost everything or gained everything
in a day. But when Hester thought of the bank,
and of all the peaceable wealth with which Vernon's
was associated, and of the young men going to their
office tranquilly every day, and the quiet continual
progress of their affairs, she could not understand
how everything could hang upon a chance, how
fortune could be gained or lost in a moment. It was
scarcely more difficult to imagine the whole economy
of the world dropping out in a moment, the heavens
rolling up like a scroll, and the foundations of the
earth giving way, than to imagine all that long-established
framework of money-making collapsing
so that one of the chief workers in it could talk of
burning his ships and suggest a moment when he<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_62" id="Page_62">[Pg 62]</a></span>
should fly away from all this&mdash;which could only
mean from every established order of things. That
her heart should rise with the sense of danger, and
that she should be ready to give her anxious help
and sympathy and eager attention, to the mystery,
whatever it was, did not make any difference in
Hester's sudden anxiety and alarm. The earth
seemed to tremble under her feet. Her whole life
and the action of the world itself seemed to hang in
suspense. She did what she had never in her life
thought possible before. She went out early, pretending
some little business, and hung about on the
watch, with her veil down, and her mind in a tumult
impossible to describe, to meet Edward, if possible,
on his way to the bank. Could it be Hester, so
proud, so reserved as she was, that did this? Her
cheeks burned and her heart beat with shame: but
it seemed to her that she could not endure the
suspense, that she must see and question him, and
know what it was. But Edward had gone to the
bank earlier than usual, which was a relief as well
as a disappointment unspeakable to her. She stole
home, feeling herself the most shameless, the least
modest of girls; yet wondered whether she could
restrain herself and keep still, and not make another
effort to see him, for how could she live in this
suspense? Punishment came upon her, condign
and terrible. She fell into the hands of Emma
Ashton, who was taking a little walk along the
road in the morning, to wake her up a little, she
said, after the ball last night, and who, utterly<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_63" id="Page_63">[Pg 63]</a></span>
unconscious of Hester's trouble and agitated looks,
had so many things to tell her, and turned back
with her, delighted to have a companion. "For
though a little exercise is certainly the best thing
for you, it is dull when you take it all by yourself,"
Emma said.</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_64" id="Page_64">[Pg 64]</a></span></p>




<h2><a name="CHAPTER_IV" id="CHAPTER_IV">CHAPTER XXXIV.</a></h2>

<h3>DOUBTS AND FEARS.</h3>


<p>The abruptness with which Edward Vernon
retired from the discussion with his partner and
agent had a singular effect upon both. Neither
accepted it as done in good faith. It surprised and
indeed startled them. What they had looked for
was a prolonged discussion, ending in all probability
in a victory for Edward, who was by far the most
tenacious of the three, and least likely to yield to
the others. So easy a conclusion of the subject
alarmed them more than the most obstinate maintenance
of his own views. They were so much
surprised indeed that they did not communicate
their astonishment to each other on the spot by
anything more than an interchange of looks, and
parted after a few bewildered remarks about nothing
in particular, neither of them venturing to begin
upon a subject so delicate. But when they next met
reflection had worked upon both. Neither had been
able to dismiss the matter from his thoughts. They<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_65" id="Page_65">[Pg 65]</a></span>
met indeed in a most inappropriate atmosphere for
any such grave discussion, at Ellen Merridew's house,
where they mutually contemplated each other from
opposite sides of the room, with an abstraction not
usual to either. It had a great effect upon both
of them, also, that neither Hester nor Edward
appeared. Roland had known beforehand and
reconciled himself as well as he could to the former
want: and Harry did not know it, and was full of
curious and jealous alarm on the subject, unable to
refrain from a suspicion that the two who were
absent must have somehow met and be spending
at least part of the time together free from all
inspection&mdash;a thing which was really happening,
though nothing could be more unlikely, more unprecedented
than that it should happen. Roland
did not think thus; he knew very well that Edward
had not attempted to hold any intercourse with
Hester, and felt that as far as this was concerned
there was no extra danger in the circumstances:
but Harry's alarm seemed to confirm all his own
ideas on the other matter. He missed Hester
greatly for his own part&mdash;not that he did not do his
best to make several of the Redborough young ladies
believe that to recall himself to her individual recollection
was the special object of his visit&mdash;but
that was a mere detail of ordinary existence. It
was Hester he had looked forward to as the charm
of the evening, and everything was insipid to him
without her, in the feminine society around him.
It was not till after supper, when the fun had<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_66" id="Page_66">[Pg 66]</a></span>
become faster and more furious that he found himself
standing close to Harry whose countenance in the
midst of all this festivity was dull and lowering as a
wintry sky. Harry did not dance much; he was a
piece of still life more than anything else in his
sister's house: loyally present to stand by her, doing
everything she asked him, but otherwise enduring
rather than enjoying. This was not at all Roland's
<i>r&ocirc;le</i>: but on this special evening when they got
together after midnight the one was not much more
lively and exhilarating in aspect than the other.
They stood up together in a doorway, the privileged
retreat of such observers, and made some gloomy
remarks to each other. "Gets to look a little absurd,
don't it, this sort of thing, when you have a deal on
your mind?" Harry said out of his moustache.
And "Yes. Gaiety does get depressing after a
while," Roland remarked. After which they relapsed
again into dead silence standing side by side.</p>

<p>"Mr. Ashton, what do you mean by it?" cried
Ellen. "I have given up Harry: but <i>you</i> usually
do your duty. Good gracious! I see <i>three</i> girls
not dancing, though I always have more men on
purpose. I don't know what you boys mean."</p>

<p>"Let us alone, Ashton and I, Nell&mdash;we've got
something to talk about," said Harry.</p>

<p>His sister looked up half alarmed in his face.</p>

<p>"I declare since you've gone so much into business
you're <i>insupportable</i>, Harry," she cried. It seemed
to bring the two men a little closer to each other
when she whisked off again into the crowd.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_67" id="Page_67">[Pg 67]</a></span></p>

<p>"It's quite true," said Harry, "let's go into the
hall, where there's a little quiet. I do want awfully
to talk to you. What do you think about Ned
giving up that business all at once, when we both
stood up to him about it? I was awfully grateful
to you for standing by me. I scarcely expected it;
but as for Ned giving in like that, I can scarcely
believe it even now."</p>

<p>"It was not much like him, it must be confessed,"
Roland said.</p>

<p>"Like him! he never did such a thing in his life
before; generally he doesn't even pay much attention
to what one says. He has a way of just facing you
down however you may argue, with a sort of a smile
which makes me fit to dance with rage sometimes.
But to-day he was as meek as Moses&mdash;What do you
think? I&mdash;don't half like it, for my part."</p>

<p>"You think after all he was in the right
perhaps?"</p>

<p>"No, I don't. I never could do that. To risk
other people in that way is what I never would
consent to. But a fellow who is so full of fight and
so obstinate, to give in&mdash;that's what I don't
understand."</p>

<p>"You think perhaps&mdash;he has not given in," Roland
said.</p>

<p>Harry gave him a bewildered look, half grateful,
half angry. "Now I wonder what I've said that
has made you think that!"</p>

<p>"Nothing that you have said&mdash;perhaps only an
uneasy feeling in my own mind that it isn't natural,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_68" id="Page_68">[Pg 68]</a></span>
and that I don't understand it any more than
you."</p>

<p>"Well," said Harry, with a long breath of relief,
"that is just what I think. I don't believe for a
moment, you understand, that Ned, who is a real
good fellow all through"&mdash;here he made a slight
pause, and glanced at Roland with a sort of defiance,
as if expecting a doubt, which however was not
expressed&mdash;"means anything underhand, you know.
Of <i>course</i> I don't mean that. But when a man
knows that he is cleverer than another fellow, he'll
just shut up sometimes and take his own way,
feeling it's no use to argue&mdash;I don't mean he thinks
himself cleverer than you, Ashton; that's a different
affair. But he hasn't much opinion of me. And
in most things no doubt he's right, and I've never
set up to have much of an opinion."</p>

<p>"There you are wrong, Vernon," said Roland,
"you have the better judgment of the two. Edward
may be cleverer as you say, but I'd rather throw in
my lot with you."</p>

<p>"Do you really say so?" cried Harry, lighting up;
"well, that is very kind of you anyhow. My only
principle is we've got others to consider besides
ourselves."</p>

<p>"Precisely so," said Roland, who had heard this
statement already, "and you were quite right to
stick to it: but I confess I am like you, not quite
comfortable about the other matter. Has he means
enough of his own to go in for it? If so, I should
think that was what he intended."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_69" id="Page_69">[Pg 69]</a></span></p>

<p>Harry shook his head. "We had none of us any
means," he said. "Aunt Catherine took us, as you
might say, off the streets. We were not even very
near relations. She's done everything for us: that's
why I say doubly, don't let us risk a penny of her
money or of what she prizes above money. You may
think we were not very grateful to her," Harry
continued, "but that's only Ellen's way of talking.
If there was anything to be done for Aunt Catherine
that little thing has got as true a heart as any one.
But we were not wanted, as you may say. Ned was
always the favourite, and so Nell set up a little in
opposition, but never meaning any harm."</p>

<p>"I feel sure of that," said Roland, with a warmer
impulse than perhaps Mrs. Ellen in her own person
would have moved him to. And then he added, after
a pause, "I think I'll open the subject again. If
Edward Vernon means to do anything rash, it's better
he should be in my hands than in some, perhaps,
that might be less scrupulous. I'll see him to-morrow
about it. There's no time lost, at least&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"That's capital!" cried Harry, warmly; "that's
exactly what I wanted. I didn't like to ask you;
but that's acting like a true friend: and if, as a
private person, there's anything I could do to back
him up&mdash;only not to touch Vernon's, you know&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>Their privacy was broken in upon by the swarm
of dancers pouring into the coolness of the hall as
the dance ended; but up to the moment when the
assembly broke up Harry continued, by an occasional
meaning look now and then across the heads of the<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_70" id="Page_70">[Pg 70]</a></span>
others, to convey his cheerful confidence in Roland,
and assurance that now all would go well. Ashton,
too, had in himself a certain conviction that it must
be so. He was not quite so cheerful as Harry, for
the kind of operations into which Edward's proposal
might bring him were not to his fancy. But the
very solemn charge laid upon him by the old people
had never faded from his memory, and Catherine
Vernon in herself had made a warm impression upon
him. He had been received here as into a new home&mdash;he
who knew no home at all; everybody had been
kind to him. He had met here the one girl whom,
if he could ever make up his mind to marry (which
was doubtful), he would marry. Everything combined
to endear Redborough to him. He had an
inclination even (which is saying a great deal) to
sacrifice himself in some small degree in order to
save a heartbreak, a possible scandal in this cheerful
and peaceful place. Edward Vernon, indeed, in
himself was neither cheerful nor peaceable; but he
was important to the preservation of happiness and
comfort here. Therefore Roland's resolution was
taken. He had come on purpose to dissuade and
prevent; he made up his mind now to further, and
secure the management of this over-bold venture,
since no better might be. He knew nothing, nor did
any but the writer of it know anything, of the letter
which Catherine Vernon's butler had carefully
deposited in the postbag, and sent into Redborough
an hour or two before this conversation, to be despatched
by the night mail. The night express<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_71" id="Page_71">[Pg 71]</a></span>
from the north called at Redborough station about
midnight, and many people liked to travel by it,
arriving in town in the morning for their day's
business, not much the worse if they had good
nerves&mdash;for there was only one good train in
the day.</p>

<p>Next morning, accordingly, just after Hester had
returned with Emma from that guilty and agitated
walk, which she had taken with the hope of meeting
Edward, and hearing something from him about his
mysterious communication of the previous night&mdash;Roland
too set out with much the same purpose,
with a grave sense of embarking on an enterprise
he did not see the end of. He met the two girls
returning, and stopped to speak to them.</p>

<p>"Hester has been at Redborough this morning
already," Emma said. "I tell her she should have
been at Mrs. Merridew's last night, Roland. It was
a very nice dance&mdash;the very nicest of all, I think;
but perhaps that is because I am so soon going
away. A regular thing is so nice&mdash;always something
to look forward to; and you get to know
everybody, and who suits your steps best, and all
that. I have enjoyed it so very much. It is not
like town, to be sure, but it is so friendly and
homely. I shall miss it above everything when I
go away."</p>

<p>"It was unkind not to come last night, my only
chance," said Roland. He had no conception that
Hester could have the smallest share in the grave
business of which his mind was full, and, grave as<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_72" id="Page_72">[Pg 72]</a></span>
it was, his mind was never too deeply engaged in
anything for this lighter play of eye and voice. She
seemed to wake up from a sort of abstraction, which
Emma's prattle had not disturbed, when he spoke,
and blushed with evident excitement under his
glance. There was in her, too, a sort of consciousness,
almost of guilt, which he could not understand.
"I hope you were sorry," he added, "and were not
more agreeably occupied: which would be an additional
unkindness."</p>

<p>"I am afraid I can't say I am sorry."</p>

<p>Her colour varied; her eyes fell. She was not
the same Hester she had been even last night;
something had happened to the girl. It flashed
across his mind for the moment that Edward had
been absent too, which gave a sting of pique and
jealousy to his thoughts: but reassured himself,
remembering that these two never met except at
the Merridews. Where could they meet? Edward,
who conformed to all Catherine Vernon's ways,
though with resentment and repugnance, and
Hester, who would conform to none of them. He
was glad to remind himself of this as he walked on,
disturbed by her look, in which there seemed so
much that had not been there before. She seemed
even to have some insight into his own meaning&mdash;some
sort of knowledge of his errand, which it was
simply impossible she could have. He told himself
that his imagination was too lively, that this little
society, so brimful of individual interests, with its
hidden motives and projects, was getting too much<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_73" id="Page_73">[Pg 73]</a></span>
for him. He had not been in the habit of pausing
to ask what So-and-So was thinking of, what that
look or this meant. In ordinary society it is enough
to know what people say and do; when you begin
to investigate their motives it is a sign that something
is going wrong. The next thing to do would
be to settle down among them, and become one of
the Redborough coterie, to which suggestion Roland,
with a slight shiver, said Heaven forbid! No, he
had not come to that point. Town and freedom
were more dear to him than anything he could find
here. Hester, indeed (if he was sure he could afford
it), might be a temptation; but Hester by no means
meant Redborough. She would not cling to the
place which had not been very gracious to her.
But he could not afford it, he said to himself,
peremptorily, as he went on. It was not a thing
to be thought of. A young man making his way in
the world, living, as yet a bachelor life, may have a
little house at Kilburn with his sister; but that
would not at all please him with a wife. And
Hester meant her mother as well. It was out of
the question; it was not to be thought of. But
why did she look so strangely conscious? why was
she so pale, so red, so full of abstraction and agitation
to-day? If anything connected with himself
could have caused that agitation, Roland could not
answer for it what he might be led to do.</p>

<p>This thought disturbed him considerably from the
other and graver thoughts with which he had started;
but he walked on steadily all the same to the bank,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_74" id="Page_74">[Pg 74]</a></span>
and knocked at the door of Edward's room. Edward
was seated at his table reading the morning's letters
with all the calm of a reasonable and moderate man
of business&mdash;a model banker, with the credit and
comfort of other men in his hands. He looked up
with a smile of sober friendliness, and held out his
hand to his visitor. He did not pretend to be
delighted to see him. The slightest, the very most
minute shadow of a consciousness that this was
not an hour for a visitor, was on his tranquil
countenance.</p>

<p>"You man of pleasure," he said, "after your late
hours and your dances, how do you manage to find
your way into the haunts of business at this time in
the morning!" and he glanced almost imperceptibly
at his letters as he spoke.</p>

<p>"I am in no hurry," said Roland. "Read
your letters. You know I have nothing particular
to do here. I can wait your leisure; but I have
something to say to you, Vernon, if you will let me."</p>

<p>"My letters are not important. Of course I will
let you. I am quite at your disposal," Edward said;
but there was still a shade of annoyance&mdash;weariness&mdash;as
at a person importunate who would not take
a hint and convey himself away.</p>

<p>"I wanted to speak to you about the subject of
our conversation yesterday."</p>

<p>"Yes, which was that?"</p>

<p>"It was important enough to have remained in
my memory," said Roland, with a little offence,
feeling himself put in the wrong from the beginning.<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_75" id="Page_75">[Pg 75]</a></span>
"I mean the proposals we were discussing&mdash;your
ideas on the subject of the&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Oh <i>that</i>! but you put a stop to all my ideas,
Harry and you in your wisdom. I thought you
must have meant that little matter about Aunt
Catherine's books. Yes, it seemed to me, so far
as my lights went, that the proposals were very
promising: and I might have stood out against
Harry, who will never set the Thames on fire; till
you came down upon me with your heavy guns&mdash;you
whom I expected to be on my side."</p>

<p>"Then you have really given it up?" cried
Roland, with a sigh of relief.</p>

<p>"Didn't you mean me to do so? That is what
I thought, at all events. You were so determined
about it, that I really don't see what else I could
have done, unless," he said, with a smile, "I had
been a capitalist, and completely independent, as
you said."</p>

<p>"I am most thankful to hear it, Vernon. I had
not been able to divest myself of the idea that you
were still hankering after it," said Roland; "and
I came, intending to say to you, that if your heart
was really set upon it&mdash;rather than that you
should put yourself into hands, perhaps not so
scrupulous&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Ah! I see: rather than that a rival should get
the business&mdash;let us speak plainly," said Edward,
with a pale smile.</p>

<p>"That is not speaking plainly. It is altogether
different from my meaning; but take it so, if you<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_76" id="Page_76">[Pg 76]</a></span>
please. I am glad to know that there is no necessity
for my intrusion anyhow," Roland said; and then
there was a little pause.</p>

<p>At last Edward got up, and came forward, holding
out his hand.</p>

<p>"Pardon the little spite that made me put so
false an interpretation on your motive, Ashton.
I know that was not what you meant. I was
annoyed, I confess, that you did thwart me yesterday
in a matter I had so much at heart."</p>

<p>"I felt that you were annoyed; but what could
I do? I can only advise according to my judgment.
Anyhow, Vernon, I came here intending to say,
'Let me do the best I can for you if you persist;
don't throw yourself among those who promote that
kind of speculation, for they are not to be trusted
to.' But I am above measure glad to find that you
have no hankering after it. That is far the best
solution. You take a weight off my mind," Roland
said.</p>

<p>Edward did not answer for the moment. He
went back and reseated himself at his table. When
he showed his face again, Roland saw he was
laughing.</p>

<p>"After all you said to me yesterday, and Harry!
think of Harry's grand argument coming down upon
me like a sledge-hammer, as potent, and alas, quite
as heavy&mdash;how could you think it possible that
I should persist? I am not such a determined
character. Besides, don't you know I have never
been trained to act for myself?"</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_77" id="Page_77">[Pg 77]</a></span></p>

<p>His laugh, his look, were not very convincing, but
at all events they were conclusive. After another
pause, Roland rose.</p>

<p>"I am interfering with your work," he said. "I
thought it my duty to come at once; but now that
it's all over, I must not waste your time. Pardon
my officiousness."</p>

<p>"Nothing of the sort," said Edward, smiling cheerfully;
"the kindest feeling. I know it is. Are you
going to see Harry? He is in his room, I know."</p>

<p>"Yes, I think I'll just speak to him. There is
some football match that Emma wants to see."</p>

<p>"More pleasuring," said Edward, and laughed
again. There was in him such an air of having
found his visitor out, that Roland could not divest
himself of a certain embarrassment. Edward, he
felt, knew as well as he did, that he was going to
report his failure to Harry. It fretted him beyond
description to be thus seen through, he, who had
thought himself so much more than a match for any
provincial fellow of them all. "But you are quite
right to consult Harry about football; he is the
greatest possible authority upon that subject,"
Edward said.</p>

<p>"Oh, it is not of the slightest importance; it
is merely that Emma, who does not really care a
straw for football, and only wants something to
do, or see&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"That is surely reason enough," said Edward, and
his complaisance went so far that he left his papers
again, and led the way to Harry's room, where he<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_78" id="Page_78">[Pg 78]</a></span>
looked in, saying, "Here's Ashton come to inquire
about that match."</p>

<p>"Eh? Match?" cried Harry, in much surprise.
Then his faculties kindled at the sight of Roland's
face. "Will you play for us, Ashton? I didn't
know you went in for football. I just wanted a
man to be&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"It was for Emma; your sister told her she must
go and see it."</p>

<p>"I'll leave you to your explanations," said Edward,
with a laugh of triumph. And indeed the two conspirators
looked at each other somewhat crestfallen,
when he had gone away.</p>

<p>"He takes it quite lightly," said Roland, with the
sense of talking under his breath, "as if he had
never thought of the matter again&mdash;does not conceal
that he was vexed, but says of course there was an end
when I came down upon him with my heavy guns."</p>

<p>Then they looked at each other guiltily&mdash;ashamed,
though there was nothing to be ashamed of, like
plotters found out.</p>

<p>"Well, that's something tided over," Harry said.</p>

<p>"I hope so: but I must not stay, to confirm his
suspicions. Tell me when the match is for Emma,
for she does want to go and see it, that's quite true."</p>

<p>"I don't care for girls about," said Harry; "they
never understand the game, and it makes fellows
nervous. It's on Saturday, if she wants to come."</p>

<p>"I'll tell her it makes fellows nervous," said
Roland, as he went away. He said it in a louder
tone than usual, that he might be heard in<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_79" id="Page_79">[Pg 79]</a></span>
Edward's room, and then despised himself for
doing so. Altogether he had seldom felt more small
or more completely baffled and seen through than
when he retired from those doors which he had
entered with so kind a purpose. It is embarrassing
to have the tables turned upon you, even in the
smallest matters. He felt that he had been made
to appear officious, intrusive, deceitful, even to himself,
making up plots with one man against another,
prying into that other's purposes, attributing falsehood
to him. This was how his generous intention
was cast back upon his hands. He tried to smile
cynically, and to point out to himself the foolishness
of straining to do a good action; but he was not a
cynic by nature, and the effort was not successful.
In any way, however, in which it could be contemplated,
it was evident that all had been done
that it was possible to do. If Edward had made up
his mind to the risk, he could not stand between
him and ruin. The matter was taken entirely out
of his hands.</p>

<p>Edward, for his part, returned to his room, and
shut himself in with feelings much less victorious
than those he made apparent. The excitement of
the great decision had a little failed and gone off.
He was in the chill reactionary stage, wondering
what might befall, feeling the tugs of old prejudice,
of all the traditions of honour in which he had been
brought up, dragging at his heart. No man brought
up as Edward had been could be without prejudices
on the side of right. It alarmed and wounded him<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_80" id="Page_80">[Pg 80]</a></span>
to-day to think that he had last night considered
the property of the bank and its customers as a
foundation upon which to start his own venture.
The sophisms with which he had blinded himself
in his excitement failed him now&mdash;the daylight was
too clear for them. He perceived that it was other
people's goods, other people's money, which he was
risking; that even to take them out, to look at
them, to think of them as in his power, was a
transgression of the laws of honour. Those chill
drawings back of customary virtue, of the prejudices
of honour, from the quick march of passion which
had hurried him past every landmark in that haste
to be rich, which would see no obstacle in its way,
plunged Edward into painful discouragement. He
seemed to himself to have fallen down from a
height, at which he had been master of his fate,
to some deep-lying underground where he was its
slave, and could only wait till the iron car of necessity
rolled on and crushed him. He had set, he
felt, machinery in motion which he could not stop,
which might destroy him. He sat and looked out
affrighted upon all the uncomprehended forces which
seemed to have got into movement against him.
He, a poor adventurer, with nothing that was his
own, to thrust himself into the midst of the commercial
movements in London, which nobody out
of them could understand fully; he to risk thousands
who had nothing; he to "go in to win" who had
nothing to stand upon! He saw all round him, not
only destruction, not only ruin, but contempt and<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_81" id="Page_81">[Pg 81]</a></span>
outrage. He had once seen a miserable "welsher"
hunted from a racecourse, and the spectacle, so cruel,
so barbarous, yet not unjust, came back to his mind
with a horrible fascination. He remembered the
poor wretch's hat battered down upon his head,
blinding him&mdash;the clothes torn from his back, the
cruelty with which he was pursued, and still more,
the mud and dirt, that meant not only punishment
but unutterable contempt. Under that recollection
Edward sat shivering. What was he better than
the welsher? Though he sat there, to all appearance,
spruce and cool, reading his morning's letters, he
was already in this state of miserable depression and
terror when Roland came in. The post that morning
had brought him no fresh alarm, no new excitement.
He was safe for that day; nothing could yet have
been done in his affairs that was not remediable.
It was possible even that by telegraphing now he
could stop all those horrible wheels of destiny, and
undo the decision of last night. As a matter of
fact, no intention of doing so was in his mind; but
the idea came uppermost now and then in the
boiling up and ferment within him: to stop everything
still, to relapse into the Edward of three
months ago&mdash;submissive, respectable, keeping every
punctilio of the domestic laws, as well as those of
recognised honesty and prudence. But he never
meant it; he was alarmed at himself, shaken out of
all that ease which excitement gives, that possibility
of believing what we wish; but though everything
that last night pointed to success seemed now to<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_82" id="Page_82">[Pg 82]</a></span>
point to despair, he felt himself clinging on to the
chance with desperation commensurate with the
gloomy prospect. Whatever it was to lead to, he
must yet go on. After all, prudence itself sometimes
fared as badly as hardihood. An investment that
had been calculated upon as the surest and safest
would sometimes turn out disastrous. Who could
tell? The chances of money were beyond all calculation.
And, after all, no one could say that the
ruin of the bank would be for his good. It would
be ruin to himself. It was not a thing that anybody
could suppose he would risk without deliberation.</p>

<p>He was in this condition, surging and seething,
when Roland visited him, and brought him suddenly
to himself with the force which an encounter with
the world outside so often gives to a struggling
spirit. He felt, with a wonderful sense of self-satisfaction,
that he was equal to the emergency,
and confronted it with a sudden gain of calm and
strength which seemed to him almost miraculous,
like what men engaged in holy work are justified
in considering help from above. It could not be
help from above which supplied Edward with self-possession
and strength for his first steps in the
career of evil, but still the relief was great. He got
the better of Roland, he extinguished the little
virtuous plot which he divined between him and
Harry, and he returned to his room with a smile
on his face. But once back again there he did not
feel triumphant. He felt that he was not trusted&mdash;that
already they suspected him of having broken<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_83" id="Page_83">[Pg 83]</a></span>
loose from their society and acting for himself. He
said to himself angrily that but for this he would
probably have telegraphed to contradict that momentous
letter of last night. But how could he do
it now? it would be pandering to their prejudices,
owning that he had taken an unjustifiable step.
And how was it unjustifiable? Was it not he who
was the virtual head, upon whose judgment and
insight everything depended? Supposing Catherine
to be consulted, as had ceased to be the case for
some time, partly with, partly against, her own will&mdash;but
supposing her to be consulted now, would
not she certainly give her adherence to Edward's
judgment rather than Harry's? It was not a question
there could be a moment's doubt about. She
would shake her head, and say, "You are far more
venturesome than ever I was, but if Edward really
thinks&mdash;&mdash;" Was not that always what she had
said? And ten years of experience had given him a
right to be trusted. He was acting for the best; he
looked for nothing but success. It was nerves, mere
nerves that had affected him&mdash;a reaction from the
excitement of last night.</p>

<p>And thus everything settled down. When he had
got over it, Edward was the most serene of all the
doubtful group which surrounded him, not knowing
what to make of him. Harry, who took a matter-of-fact
view, came next. He now thought it highly
probable, on the whole, that his cousin had thought
better of it. How could he do anything else?&mdash;he
had not means of his own to risk to such an extent,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_84" id="Page_84">[Pg 84]</a></span>
which was a thought very satisfactory to Harry.
Roland Ashton was as much dissatisfied as men
usually are who endeavour in vain to see into the
minds of their neighbours, and offer good offices
which are not wanted. But the most uneasy of
all was Hester, who that day, for the first time,
took upon her the most painful burden of women&mdash;the
half knowledge which is torture, which the
imagination endeavours to supplement in a thousand
unreal ways, knowing them to be unreal, and dismissing
them as quickly as they are formed&mdash;and
the bitter suspense, the sensation that at any moment
things may be happening, news coming which will
bring triumph or misery, but which you cannot foresee
or accelerate, or do anything but wait for. She
did her best to pray, poor girl! breathing broken
petitions for she knew not what, as she went about
her little occupations all that lingering day. Surely
he would try to see her again, to satisfy her, and tell
what it was he had done, and how it could be possible,
winning or losing, to fly, as he had suggested,
from everything here. To fly&mdash;how could it be?
Why should it be? All the other mysteries came in
that to wonder unspeakable and dismay.</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_85" id="Page_85">[Pg 85]</a></span></p>




<h2><a name="CHAPTER_V" id="CHAPTER_V">CHAPTER XXXV.</a></h2>

<h3>A DISCOVERY.</h3>


<p>There was a dinner-party that evening at the
Grange. It was given on account of Ashton, now well
known in Redborough; and Catherine Vernon had
taken the trouble to go herself to beg Captain
Morgan to be of the party: but the old man had
refused steadily.</p>

<p>"I will have none of your fine company," he said.
"No, no; you do enough for me here. When you
come to see us it always is a pleasure, both to my old
woman and me: but a dinner, no. I have not had
on my evening coat this dozen of years. It's not
likely it would be in the fashion now."</p>

<p>"What does it matter about fashion? You shall
come as you are if you would like that better,"
Catherine said; but she did not mean it, and of
that they were all perfectly aware. "It is to do
honour to Roland. You are no longer so anxious
to separate yourself from Roland as when he came
here first," she said.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_86" id="Page_86">[Pg 86]</a></span></p>

<p>The old man did not say anything, but his wife
answered for him.</p>

<p>"We will not commit ourselves, Catherine, you
know our way; but we think the boy does us credit.
I think it might be that if we were left to ourselves
we might even do a little match-making for him if
we could."</p>

<p>"Are you come to that?" said Catherine: but
there was an echo of a sigh in her voice. "That
seems to me to mean a confession&mdash;that we are not
enough for them any longer, but still that we will
not give in; we will be enough for them in another
way."</p>

<p>"Why should we be enough for them? We could
not think that was possible, living far off as we do,
and in a different way. No, but out of pure love,
which is just as foolish as anything else. I am the
wisest in this respect, for I know it will not do."</p>

<p>"And who is the lady?" Catherine asked with a
smile.</p>

<p>The next moment she saw very well who it was,
for they did not make her any reply. Old Mrs.
Morgan folding her hands said quietly, "It will
never answer," and the captain, leaving the mantelpiece
against which he had been leaning with his
face fully presented to her questioning, went and sat
down in his usual place near the window, which
afforded no such facilities to a penetrating eye.
They did not mean to tell her, and she knew.
She laughed to carry off the little annoyance with
which this preference and prejudice, as she called it,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_87" id="Page_87">[Pg 87]</a></span>
always moved her, and said, "You should exert
yourself in his sister's favour; by all she tells me she
would not be ungrateful," in a way which communicated
the annoyance she felt back again to her
friends.</p>

<p>"We will not meddle with Emma," said old Mrs.
Morgan. "I am tempted to think sometimes that
the blood gets thin in a race when it runs too long,
like the last cup of my tea&mdash;which he says is just
hot water."</p>

<p>"Not so, not so," said old Captain Morgan. "You
are growing a materialist in your old age; that is
sometimes just the very essence and cream of all. In
story-books, when there are an old couple left like
you and me, the last child left with them to make
them happy is a creature that is perfect."</p>

<p>"Oh, this is heresy indeed," cried Catherine. "I
will not have you compare Emma to your last cup of
tea. There is nobody I meet with so original; and
is she to stay longer and have her chance? or has
she come to the height of her desires and persuaded
the gentleman to speak&mdash;there is nothing I want so
much to know."</p>

<p>But here Catherine became vaguely sensible of a
sentiment which, according to their own account,
had died out long ago in these old people. They
had declared themselves above prejudice in respect
to their own flesh and blood. The captain indeed
had thrown off all responsibility, and announced at
Roland's first coming that he was not prepared to
answer for him: and Emma had not been so<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_88" id="Page_88">[Pg 88]</a></span>
congenial to them as Roland. Notwithstanding, when
their grandchild was thus freely criticised it galled
them both. The old lady betrayed a little rising
colour of vexation and shame, and Captain Morgan
got up again restlessly and went and stood against
the window, shutting out half the light, and turning
his back&mdash;which was a very strong step, though but
for a moment&mdash;upon his guest.</p>

<p>"She has not been brought up like other girls,"
said Mrs. Morgan. "Perhaps it was none of our
duty; it is hard to say. We knew nothing of her:
poor little motherless thing, we might have brought
her away with us; but these are all questions it is
little use going into now. Such as she is, she is a
good girl in her way. When she is married, for she
will be sure to marry, she will make a good, careful
wife."</p>

<p>"One would think I had been saying harm of
Emma," cried Catherine, with some quickness; "when
the fact is I am one of those that like her most.
She is the most piquant variety of her species.
There is nobody that amuses me so much. She
knows what she wants, which so few do, and she
means to have it. She is quite honest and straight-forward.
You do me injustice in this."</p>

<p>There was nothing said in reply, and Catherine
did not like the position. Perhaps the universal
submission to which she was accustomed had spoilt
her, though she was so sure of seeing through it.
She got up to go away.</p>

<p>"I must do without you then, uncle, if I am not<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_89" id="Page_89">[Pg 89]</a></span>
to have you; though I think it is a little hard upon
me&mdash;and upon Roland too."</p>

<p>"We are always here when you want us, Catherine;
as much as is in us is always at your service.
It is not much," said the old man, hobbling after her
to the door; "but your fine house and your fine
people are not in <i>her</i> way nor in mine. And what
should I do going back to the world, and <i>her</i> in the
arm-chair? You see yourself that would never do."</p>

<p>"It would delight her!" said Catherine, pausing
at the door; "you know that. Fancy her keeping
you by her because she is not able to go out too!
It almost looks as if&mdash;but that is impossible&mdash;you
did not understand a woman yet."</p>

<p>The old captain laughed and shook his white
head.</p>

<p>"Persuade yourself that!" he said; "make yourself
think that: that will chime in with the general
opinion, Catherine. If I were an old man on the
stage I would say, there's no understanding women.
If I don't understand her and all her ways, I am a
sillier old blockhead than you think."</p>

<p>"Then you know that what I say is true&mdash;that
she would like you to come&mdash;that it would please
her&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Then it is she that is the silly old woman that
does not understand her old man," Captain Morgan
said.</p>

<p>Catherine left them with the impression that they
were in a mood beyond her comprehension. It was
a fine, clear, almost warm day, and the roads dry<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_90" id="Page_90">[Pg 90]</a></span>
and walking pleasant. She had come on foot, as
was not very usual with her, and meant to walk
home. She set out on her return waving her hand
to Mrs. Morgan, but in no very cheerful frame of
mind. She had not been cheerful when she left
home. Her mind misgave her as it had not done
before for more years than she could count. What was
the reason she could scarcely tell. Edward was not
really less kind, less observant of her comfort. The
change she saw in him was one indescribable, which
no one else would have suspected, which in all
probability existed in her imagination alone. Why
should she suppose evils that had no existence?
There was no one like him, no son so dutiful to
his mother, no one so ready to make any sacrifice
for the pleasure of his home. If his looks had been
a little abstracted lately, if he had spent his time
away from her, if his work in his own room, which
she had made so comfortable for him, which she had
been so anxious to assure him the exclusive proprietorship
of, had increased of late, perhaps this
was merely the natural course of events. Or if he
had fallen in love&mdash;what then? Did the boy perhaps
think that she would be jealous and stand in
the way of his happiness? How little he knew!
Provided only his choice was a right one; she would
open her arms and her heart. She would be ready
to do anything for their comfort. There was no
sacrifice she would not gladly make. Notwithstanding
that somewhat nonsensical mystical flourish of
the old captain's about his understanding of his<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_91" id="Page_91">[Pg 91]</a></span>
wife, Catherine believed, and with much show of
truth, that men rarely understood women, and never
knew how ready they were to arrange everything, to
give up everything for the comfort and pleasure of
those they loved. What a welcome she would
herself give to Edward's wife, though he was
trembling and putting off and afraid to tell her!
What a reception that young woman should have!
Provided always&mdash;but with Edward's good taste
and good sense how could he go wrong in such a
choice?</p>

<p>It was at this moment that a shuffling light step
became audible, hurrying along the road, and a voice
calling "Catherine&mdash;is it really Catherine?" followed
by another step and another voice, with a
fainter sound in the repetition, but also calling upon
"Catherine!" Catherine Vernon paused and looked
round, her face losing its gravity and brightening
into its usual humorous look of half-contemptuous
toleration.</p>

<p>"It is Catherine!" cried Miss Vernon-Ridgway;
"I told you so. Dear Catherine, isn't this long walk
too much for you, and on such a cold day? Take
my arm&mdash;please take my arm: or won't you come
back to our little house and rest, and we'll send for
the carriage? It is a long walk for us who are not
used to luxury, and what must it be to you?"</p>

<p>It was true that the Miss Vernon-Ridgways were
under fifty, and Catherine was sixty-five; but she
was far more vigorous than they were, and more
capable of exercise. She turned round upon them<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_92" id="Page_92">[Pg 92]</a></span>
smiling, but kept her arms close by her side, and
refused any support.</p>

<p>"I assure you," she said, "I am quite capable of
walking. You know I have always been accustomed
to exercise."</p>

<p>"Ah yes," said the sisters, "you were brought up
sensibly, dear Catherine, not spoiled darlings as we
were. We have never quite got over it, though we
should have known better long ago, if experience
was all: no one can tell how we miss our carriage;
and when we see you on foot, who can command
every ease, it quite wounds our feelings," said Miss
Martha, coming in at the end in a little provocation
by herself.</p>

<p>"It is very kind of you: but it does not at all
hurt my feelings. This is a fine day for a walk,
and I hope you are enjoying yours, as I do," said
Catherine, with her laughing look.</p>

<p>They both shook their heads.</p>

<p>"We do what we have to do, and I hope we don't
complain. But I declare I feel hurt that you should
have been at the Heronry and not paid us a visit.
I wish not to be jealous. You were no doubt talking
things over with Mrs. John?"</p>

<p>"I know nothing that there is to talk over with
Mrs. John," said Catherine, tartly. "I was visiting
my old uncle, which is a duty I never like to neglect."</p>

<p>"Oh!" said one sister, and "Ah!" said the other.
Then they cried eagerly each to each, "I knew it
was a vile story. Of course we have been
misinformed."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_93" id="Page_93">[Pg 93]</a></span></p>

<p>"What was there to be misinformed about?" said
Catherine; then as she looked from one to another,
a sensation of coming trouble shot across her. "And
what," she added with a smile not so easy as the former
one, "am I supposed to have to say to Mrs. John?"</p>

<p>"Oh, it was all an accident of course," said Miss
Matilda. "But you might tell Catherine all the
same. It is best that people should know; and
then they know what steps to take," said Miss
Martha. "To be sure Catherine would know what
steps to take," Matilda added again.</p>

<p>"This may all be very amusing," said Catherine,
"but as I don't know the word of the puzzle, I don't
see the joke, you know. One would think something
had happened in which I was concerned."</p>

<p>"I am not sure if you would think anything had
happened. Oh yes, I am sure we thought so last
night," cried the sisters one after another. "You see
the least little thing looks important when you are
going to bed&mdash;after eleven o'clock at night."</p>

<p>"What was this great event?" said Catherine,
with a certain sternness in her tone.</p>

<p>There was a great flutter of nods and looks
between the sisters. They came close to her, one
on either side, and Miss Matilda, always the boldest,
put a hand to Catherine's elbow by way of supporting
her if support were needed.</p>

<p>"Dear Catherine, do turn back with us to our
little place! it is close by, and we can give you
an easy chair and a cup of tea. You will bear it
better there than here."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_94" id="Page_94">[Pg 94]</a></span></p>

<p>"Did you say <i>bear</i> it better?"</p>

<p>"Oh! did I say it&mdash;<i>bear</i> it&mdash;Martha? I am sure
I don't know. I think I said hear it, Catherine.
Oh! for Heaven's sake don't look so stern. Perhaps
you will think nothing of it&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>Catherine gave her foot a stamp upon the ground.
She said&mdash;</p>

<p>"Tell me at once what you have got to tell," in a
voice which was almost threatening. They looked
at each other again, and then Miss Matilda
began&mdash;</p>

<p>"I don't want to get any one into trouble, I am
sure," she said in a faltering but eager voice. "It
frightened us so&mdash;that was the thing. It frightened
us about you. I said to Martha, 'Dear Catherine
must be ill; nothing less than that would bring him
here at such an hour.' You see the voices roused us
just as we were going to bed. Mrs. John's door was
locked, for I had heard her do it; she always does it
herself, and, judging by her usual hours, she must
have been in bed&mdash;when we heard voices at the
gate: oh, I was not surprised at that. Sometimes
it is old Captain Morgan himself, who I am sure,
with every respect for him, ought not to be out
of doors at such hours; sometimes the young gentleman,
the grandson&mdash;I don't remember his name;
or it used to be Harry Vernon in his time. We all
know that girl; we needn't say anything more on
that subject. I merely remarked, 'There she is at
the gate again.' And Martha said&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Oh, I said, 'Fiddlesticks, she is at the ball; it<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_95" id="Page_95">[Pg 95]</a></span>
must be one of the maids.' I am so unsuspicious,"
said Miss Martha.</p>

<p>"And then we listened as you may suppose.
There was just a little corner of the window open.
Of course if it had been one of the maids I should
have thought it my duty&mdash;&mdash; Catherine, you are
getting quite tired."</p>

<p>"I freely confess, yes&mdash;of your story. What do I
care for your maids and their lovers? You can
settle these surely without me."</p>

<p>"Oh, if you will only wait a little! Very soon
we could hear that it was, if you please, Miss
Hester's voice, and she was inviting some one in.
Oh, pressing him&mdash;almost forcing him. Shouldn't
you say so Martha? like the woman in the <i>Pilgrim's
Progress</i>."</p>

<p>"Yes, just like that kind of woman. Won't you
come in, just for a moment&mdash;just to rest a bit," said
Martha, changing her voice into a sort of squeak of
the most unseductive kind. "And he resisted as
long as he could; but she would take no denial.
You can't expect a young man to say 'No' if a girl
puts herself at his feet like that. So he yielded at
last, poor young fellow. We didn't blame him a bit,
did we, Martha?"</p>

<p>"Oh, not a bit! poor young man, with such a
creature as that laying herself out&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"And who was this whom you are so sorry for?"
Catherine said.</p>

<p>As if she did not know! She had been rather
glad of all the delays and <i>longueurs</i> of the tale, and<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_96" id="Page_96">[Pg 96]</a></span>
marched along through it, glad to make them out of
breath, almost hoping to be at her own door before
the crisis; but in this she did not succeed. She did
not look at them even, but kept her eyes upon the
path with steady indifference.</p>

<p>"Dear Catherine!&mdash;but you won't blame him,
poor young fellow! It was your own Edward, that
dear boy&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>Prepared as she was, the name gave her a shock, as
perhaps Miss Matilda, still holding her elbow, felt;
but if so, it was only for a moment. "Edward!"
she said with a laugh. "You mean Harry, I
suppose? Edward was at home and busy, occupying
himself in a very different sort of way."</p>

<p>At this the sisters interchanged glances again, and
shook their heads in unison. "Ah, Catherine, that
is just how you are deceived. We know Harry
Vernon's voice very well. It was Edward."</p>

<p>Catherine turned upon them with a countenance
perfectly cloudless, a laugh upon her lips. "When
I tell you," she said, "that he was in my own
house! he could not, I think, be in two places at
once&mdash;my house, his house&mdash;it is all the same. He
was at home&mdash;" she added after a moment, in a
deeper tone, "and with me."</p>

<p>"Oh! with you!" The sisters broke off with
sudden fright, not venturing to persevere. So
sudden a check quenched Miss Matilda's lively
genius altogether. It was her sister, the practical
member, who added with a spasmodic gasp, "Oh,
of course, Catherine, if he was with you&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_97" id="Page_97">[Pg 97]</a></span></p>

<p>"Yes, of course he was with me; he is only too
attentive. I could wish he took a little more
amusement. So your fine story is at an end, you
see. If it had been any one else I might have
thought it my duty to inquire into it; but as I can
prove it not to be Edward&mdash;not that I see much
harm in it if it had been Edward," she added,
turning upon the accusers again. "I am not fond
of Hester Vernon, but she is his cousin all the
same."</p>

<p>"Oh, no harm! oh, I never thought so," cried the
gossips, alarmed and faltering. "It was only just&mdash;it
was merely&mdash;it frightened us, thinking that dear
Catherine must be ill, or something happened&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Did you think then that your dear Catherine, if
she were ill, would send for Hester Vernon?&mdash;as her
prime favourite, I suppose, and the one that loved
her best among all those who&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>Catherine paused; the native magnanimity in her,
beneath all the pettiness which her laughing cynicism
had taught her, would not insult even these heartless
women by a reminder in so many words of their dependence.
It cost her all her strength to stand up
erect before them, and put off their assault. They
had got at her heart, but they should never know
it. She stood ample and serene between the two
slim shabby figures and smiled defiance. Never
were talebearers more completely discomfited. They
turned upon each other with mutual reproaches
in the confusion of the moment. "You need not
have made such a fuss, Matilda." "I told you,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_98" id="Page_98">[Pg 98]</a></span>
Martha, you oughtn't to be so confident about a
voice."</p>

<p>"Come," said Catherine, "we had better say
nothing more about it; evidently there has been
a mistake. Hester, who ought to be more careful
if she is to live at the Vernonry, must have another
admirer with whose voice you are not acquainted.
But it is unwise to form conclusions on no better
ground than the sound of a voice, and perhaps not
very charitable or kind of you, so much older than
she is, to tell anything that is uncomfortable about
that girl, who is no favourite of mine already, to
me. Don't you think you would do better if you
warned her, or her mother?" Catherine's countenance
was so calm, her eyes so commanding, that
the Miss Vernon-Ridgways, altogether defeated in
their malicious intention, which was chiefly to wound
herself, felt their knees tremble under them, and
were genuinely awe-stricken for perhaps the first
time in their lives.</p>

<p>"Oh, as for that&mdash;it was not Hester we were
thinking of&mdash;it was you," they faltered between
them, "that you might not allow&mdash;or be exposed&mdash;"
Their words got incoherent and ran away to nothing,
into breaks and frightened lapses. And when
Catherine, opening her eyes still wider, said, "For
me! to warn me!" and laughed them to scorn,
Matilda, who being the most forward was at the
same time the most sensitive, was so overcome by
anger and alarm and mortification that she began
to cry for sheer despite, and felt in her inmost<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_99" id="Page_99">[Pg 99]</a></span>
heart that she hated the woman who could humiliate
her so.</p>

<p>"You were kindly afraid that I should be tired a
few minutes ago: and standing does tire me, though
I like a walk," Catherine said. "I will say good-bye
now. Perhaps you meant it kindly; and if so,
I'll thank you too&mdash;all the more as it's a mistake&mdash;for
that is the best of it," she said with a laugh,
waving her hand: and leaving them, walked on
homewards with an alert and energetic step. But
it would have been balm to their feelings if they
had been able to see how very little like laughter
was her face when she had once turned her back
upon them. There was nobody to observe her along
that quiet road. The nursemaids with their children
had all turned townwards some time ago. There
was not a soul between her and the gate of the
Grange. Catherine's face lengthened and darkened
as if by a sudden effect of years; the sanguine life
and confidence and force went out of it. She looked
an old woman in that moment, as indeed she had a
right to do, but did not, nature interposing for her
aid. She said to herself that she would not think,
would not ask herself what it meant until she should
get home, and could feel the shelter of her own
walls about her. She wanted shelter and privacy
before she faced the fact which had been dimly
shadowing before her, but never in this form. She
was a very resolute woman, and had not come so far
in life without having to confront and overcome
many things that looked terrible enough at the first<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_100" id="Page_100">[Pg 100]</a></span>
glance. But never since those early days which
were so far off that they were half forgotten had
she been called upon to face those troubles which
sap the strength out of heart and will, the disappointments
and bitterness brought upon us by
those we love. She had few of these sufferings for
what seems the saddest reason, that she had nobody
to love. But it was not so sad as it appears. She
had a number of people whom she loved well
enough to be delighted by their prosperities, and
overcast by their troubles. She had all the advantages
of affection without being so closely knit to
any as to have its drawbacks too. But this easy
position changed when she became, so to speak, the
mother of Edward Vernon. It was not the doing of
providence, it was her own doing. She had taken it
upon herself, and for years past she had said to
herself that the boy had made her know, as she had
never known before, what happiness was. But now
here was, swinging round slowly, revealing itself to
her in glimpses, the reverse of the medal, the other
side of the picture. Was he deceiving her? She
had taken up his defence boldly, not caring what she
said: but she had believed what she heard all the
same, and had known it to be true. Was this why
he had not cared to see her, to bid her good-night,
before he came out to have that meeting with Hester&mdash;like
a shopgirl and shopboy, she said to herself,
her lip quivering with passion, vexation, derision, all
bound together by the pain that produced them&mdash;at
the gate? The commonplace character of the<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_101" id="Page_101">[Pg 101]</a></span>
meeting, the look of petty intrigue in it, humbled
her pride in her boy. If they had met at Ellen's
dance, or in any legitimate way, she thought it
would not have mortified her so much&mdash;but like
a lady's maid and a footman, like Jane the scullery-girl
and her young man! She laughed to herself
at the thought, but the laugh was more painful
than tears.</p>

<p>By and by, however, Catherine came to take a
little comfort out of the fact that Edward had not
come to bid her good-night. Not considering for a
moment that any incident of all this might be
accidental, though everything was so, she concluded
that his heart had failed him, that he had felt
himself incapable of the treachery of kissing her
cheek in the usual tender way when about to do
a thing which he knew would be so displeasing to
her. When this occurred to Catherine the whole
aspect of the matter changed: her features relaxed,
her colour came back. This, no doubt, was how it
had been. The girl had met him at Ellen's folly&mdash;how
truly a folly had never been proved till now:
and she was pretty and clever. Catherine was too
proud to deny her her natural advantages; and men
were fools, as was well known&mdash;the best of them,
the wisest of them!&mdash;where women were concerned.
She had led him into some engagement, some light
wager perhaps, some defiance of what he would
venture to do. And Edward had been silly enough
to be led away. She did not want him to be too
wise. If he was silly, it was no more than everybody<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_102" id="Page_102">[Pg 102]</a></span>
else had been before him. But he, dear boy,
true boy, having involved himself in a piece of
folly, had shown that high respect to her, that he
would rather let her suppose he had forgotten and
neglected her, than come to her with the usual
greeting when he knew he was doing something
which would seem treachery to Catherine. Thus
she, who for the first moment had known no wish
but that of pushing homeward and hiding her
sudden downfall within her own house where
nobody could intrude upon her, had so triumphantly
explained all that trouble away before she got home,
that she entered the Grange radiant, with no sense
of having a downfall to hide. The casuistry of love
is more skilful than any device of philosophy. She
explained everything to herself. She wondered that
she had not read it in his face all the evening.
She felt that it had been there, if she had only
had eyes to see. A foolish talk carried a trifle too
far&mdash;a bold girl, not bad, no, not bad&mdash;that was not
necessary, and Catherine would be just&mdash;pleased to
get a little triumph when she could over the other
side: and a foolish promise, not intended, had drawn
him, perhaps against his will. By this subtle
demonstration&mdash;which no faculty less keen than that
of love could have made&mdash;Catherine proved, to her
full satisfaction, the fundamental truth in him which
no little trumpery deceit (of a kind so innocent as
this!) could undermine. All this fine fabric was
raised on the most insignificant foundation of fact.
But what did that matter? it was enough. And if<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_103" id="Page_103">[Pg 103]</a></span>
Catherine had been told that Edward's forgetfulness
of the good-night had been accidental, and that his
meeting with Hester was accidental, and that no
incident of the night had been planned beforehand,
she would have simply and flatly denied the possibility.
She knew better; and she preferred the
matter as it stood.</p>

<p>The dinner-party was an insignificant affair to
her after this. She did full justice to it, and to
Roland Ashton, the chief guest, the man whom she
delighted to honour, and for whose pleasure and
profit the best people in Redborough were called
together. He was already known to many of them,
and it was Catherine's pleasure to make her relationship
and interest in the young visitor clear.
But her mind was eager to get through the
commonplace courtesies of the evening&mdash;to come
to the moment when Edward and she should meet
alone. She could not pass her discovery over
without note. She would tell him what she had
heard, and what she had divined. She would give
him the tender warning which such an affection
as hers had a right to offer. If it was more than
a passing flirtation (which she did not believe), to
beg him to reconsider it; if his heart should be
touched (which Heaven forbid! but the thought
made her smile, it was so profoundly unlikely), to
intreat him to reflect, and see how little satisfaction
could come to him from such intercourse. She went
over and over again the interview that was to come&mdash;so
often, indeed, that she exhausted it, and when<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_104" id="Page_104">[Pg 104]</a></span>
the moment did come, did not remember half of
what she intended to say. It came, indeed, in a
way entirely contrary to that she had imagined.
After the party had dispersed, Edward took Roland
into his room to smoke with him&mdash;which she ought
to have recollected he was in the habit of doing&mdash;and
then, what was more disappointing still, went
out with him to accompany him part of the way.
She was going down stairs to Edward's room, that
she might get these explanations off her mind
without a moment's delay, and was taken entirely
by surprise when she heard the door close, and two
voices continuing outside.</p>

<p>"Has Mr. Edward gone out?" she asked, with
a trembling she could scarcely control, of the butler,
when he came up to put out the lights.</p>

<p>"I was to say, ma'am, as he'd be back in half an
hour," said the man.</p>

<p>Catherine sent her maid to bed, and kept her
particular lamp burning on her little table, waiting
there in the dimness of the large deserted room,
hearing every crackle and rustle of the night. It
seemed to her far more than half an hour before
she heard Edward's key in the door; but she was
resolved not to be balked now. She had no idea,
poor lady, that he thought her suspicious, inquisitive,
and watchful, making domiciliary visits in order to
find him out in something, which was very far from
Catherine's disposition. She went down accordingly
to lose no time, and met him in the hall. He was
astonished to see her, as was natural enough; and<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_105" id="Page_105">[Pg 105]</a></span>
she had an uneasy tremor upon her, which was
natural too, but which looked like cold. He was
full of apologies for having kept her up.</p>

<p>"If I had known you would have waited for me,
Aunt Catherine&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"You did not say good-night to me last night,
Edward. I did not like that to happen two nights
running. I will go into your room, not to hurry
you up stairs."</p>

<p>"I can't think how that happened," he said,
following her into the cosy room, with its red
curtains and cheerful fire, and all the conveniences
and prettiness she had accumulated for him there.
"I had been thinking hard, and my mind was full of
balance-sheets and figures. I entirely forgot I had
not seen you."</p>

<p>She turned round upon him, taking his arm
between her hands, and looking with a tender
smile into his face.</p>

<p>"No, my dear boy, I know better than that.
You had a reason&mdash;which shows me how well I
have divined you, and how true you are, Edward.
I have been told where&mdash;you went to last night."</p>

<p>This startled him greatly for the moment. He
looked at her with an alarmed expression: but
seeing no anger in her face, said quickly&mdash;</p>

<p>"That was all quite accidental, Aunt Catherine.
You don't think I went there on purpose, do you?"
without shrinking at all from her eyes.</p>

<p>"Yes, Edward, I thought you did. Perhaps I
was wrong. I thought there might have been some<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_106" id="Page_106">[Pg 106]</a></span>
silly bargain&mdash;some promise made without thought:
and that you felt a little treacherous&mdash;that is a harsh
word&mdash;deceitful&mdash;that is worse&mdash;to me, and would
not come back and kiss me when you might be
supposed to be going against me. I forgave you
entirely, Edward, for that good thought."</p>

<p>He was a little touched in spite of himself.</p>

<p>"You are very good, Aunt Catherine&mdash;far better
to me than I deserve; but, as a matter of fact, it
was all purely accidental. I had been very busy,
and felt feverish and sleepless. I went out to have
a turn in the moonlight: chance took me that way.
There was light in Mrs. John's window. They heard
my steps, and looked out in great surprise, and asked
me to come in. I could scarcely satisfy her," he said,
with an embarrassed little laugh, "that you were not
ill, and had not sent for her to nurse you. It was as
good as a play," he went on, still laughing, followed
in every word by her anxious eyes, "to see poor Mrs.
John's struggle between politeness and sleep. She
was very sleepy, poor little woman! but dreadfully
polite. You may suppose I was surprised enough
to find myself there."</p>

<p>"Yes," she said, still holding him, still reading his
face with her anxious eyes, but feeling the ground
cut from under her feet. She was a little breathless
with anxiety and excitement. "I wonder&mdash;that you
did not tell me of it&mdash;this morning."</p>

<p>"Dear Aunt Catherine," he said, "pardon me, but
you have a little prejudice, you know, against these
people. And it was so entirely accidental. You<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_107" id="Page_107">[Pg 107]</a></span>
might have thought, had I told you, that it had
been done on purpose."</p>

<p>"Did I ever doubt what you said to me, Edward?"</p>

<p>"No," he said, taking her hands in his tenderly, as
she thought; and indeed the action was not without
real tenderness, for his heart was touched. "No,"
he said, smiling, "but yet you would have had a little
doubt&mdash;a little wonder whether it was really so."</p>

<p>"And it <i>was</i> really so?" she said, looking into his
face, "really&mdash;really&mdash;no little shadow of a wish for&mdash;a
little provocation, a little talk, a little fun if you
like, Edward? Oh, no, I have no prejudice. I
should know it was quite natural. And you mean
that there was nothing at all, nothing of this&mdash;a
mere accident, nothing more?"</p>

<p>He kissed her cheek, and he laughed at her in
a filial way.</p>

<p>"Didn't I tell you, Aunt Catherine? You believe
me&mdash;oh, yes; but then you ask me if really&mdash;really
I am saying what is true? Really&mdash;really as often
as you like; it was accident, and nothing more."</p>

<p>This was how all the eloquent things which
Catherine had prepared to say were never said.
She went up to bed pleased and happy, yet not so
pleased as if he had confessed her version of the story
to be the true one. She did not doubt his word&mdash;oh
no, no&mdash;but yet&mdash;the other version looked more
true to nature. She could have understood it
better that way.</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_108" id="Page_108">[Pg 108]</a></span></p>




<h2><a name="CHAPTER_VI" id="CHAPTER_VI">CHAPTER XXXVI.</a></h2>

<h3>IN THE LABYRINTH.</h3>


<p>After these events there seemed a lull, in which
nothing more seemed to happen. Though time is so
short, and our modern pace of living, we flatter ourselves,
so much more rapid than of old, how few after
all are the periods in which things happen, and with
what long stretches of vacant days between! Hester
could hardly explain to herself how it was that
Edward Vernon's sudden evening visit, so unexpected,
so unprecedented, had made an entire revolution
in her life. There had been no mutual
confessions of love, no proposal, no acceptance such
as are supposed to be necessary. There was nothing
to confide to her mother, had it been possible to take
any one into that strait union of two suddenly
become one. The effect bewildered her entirely, and
she could not tell how it had been produced; but yet
it was so. They had been on the eve of this, she
felt, for years, and the first time that they met, in a
moment of complete freedom, their souls flowed<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_109" id="Page_109">[Pg 109]</a></span>
together, flowed into one. Perhaps he had not
meant it when he came. The dim parlour and the
sleepy mother, trying hard to be polite, quite unconscious
how unnecessary her presence was; the young
man, with his eager eyes, scarcely keeping himself in&mdash;came
before her like a curious picture a hundred
times in a day: and then the sudden sweep of the
torrent after it, the almost involuntary, impetuous,
unalterable junction of these two hearts and lives.
But the shock even of happiness when it comes so
suddenly is great; and Hester was not sure even
that she was happy. He seemed to have led her to
the edge of some labyrinth, without freedom to leave
it, or to advance into its mysteries. There was a
clue, indeed, but it was lying in loose coils at her
feet, and who could tell if it ever could be sufficiently
straightened, sufficiently tightened, to give any real
guidance? There was no habit of meeting in their
lives, no way of seeing each other even, without
attracting suspicion. He sent her a letter next
morning, full of love, and of ecstatic realisation that
she was his, and that in all his difficulties he was sure
of her sympathy, but it was understood that he was
not to make such a breach of all his habits as to come
to see her; and Hester was too proud to break
through hers, as she had done that one morning in
order to see him. So that everything remained a
secret between them, and save for the sudden understanding
into which they had leaped, the sort of
betrothal which both took for granted, there was no
difference in their outward lives; which was a state<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_110" id="Page_110">[Pg 110]</a></span>
of things infinitely painful to the girl who lived her
usual daily life with her mother and her friends in a
state of guilty abstraction, thinking of <i>him</i> all the
time, and feeling herself a domestic traitor. She felt
that it was but the shell of her that remained, following
mechanically the usual occupations, talking
from the lips outward, absorbed in a long perpetual
reverie of new consciousness, new hopes and fears.
That secret world had need to have been bright to
make up to her for the sense of guilt and treachery
with which she entered into it: and it was not
bright. The air was dark and tremulous as in that
sad valley, sad yet sweet, which, in Dante, lies outside
of hell. She never could tell at what moment
some dark unknown shape of calamity might appear
through its twilight coming towards them; for
Edward had been driven to her by anxiety and
trouble, and the sense of a burden which he could
not bear alone. What was it? He did not tell her
in his letter. The other little notes he wrote were
but appeals to her sympathy&mdash;petitions to her to
love him, to think of him. Ah! Hester thought to
herself, no fear of that&mdash;but how? What was she
to think? in what way was her imagination to follow
him, groping dimly amid scenes she did not understand?
His secret was as a germ of fire in her
heart&mdash;which by times blazed up into hot flames,
devouring her with all the anguish of that thirst to
know which is one of the tortures of uneasy love.
What was it that troubled him so, that alarmed him
so, that might ruin and overwhelm him&mdash;that might<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_111" id="Page_111">[Pg 111]</a></span>
make him fly, which was the most mysterious hint
of all? But to all these questions she got no satisfaction.
For the first few days she had a little
furtive outlet to her anxiety in questioning Roland,
which she did with a vague sense of treachery to
Edward, as if she were endeavouring to surprise his
secrets by a back way, but very little perception of
the false impression which her interest in his communications
was making upon Roland, who himself
became day by day more ready to believe that
marriage might become a possible venture, and that
the decision of it rested chiefly with himself. He
knew no other reason why she should question him
than interest in himself, and it was with a grateful
zeal that he attempted to gratify a curiosity which
was so legitimate, yet so unusual. He explained his
trade with that pleasure which the wisest of men feel
in talking about themselves, and never divined that
her rapid mind passed everything through one
narrow test, <i>i.e.</i> whether it was possible that it could
concern Edward. She did not even remark the
<i>attendrissement</i> with which he received her questions,
with eyes that said volumes. These eyes overflowed
with pleasure and sentiment as he made his little
disquisitions.</p>

<p>"After this," he said, with a laugh, "you will be
armed <i>cap-&agrave;-pied</i> against any doubtful agency, and
able when you like to speculate for yourself."</p>

<p>"And why should not I speculate," said Hester,
"if I had any money? It is like fighting, I suppose.
It feels like living, they say. But after all it is no
true life&mdash;only figures, as you tell me."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_112" id="Page_112">[Pg 112]</a></span></p>

<p>"Figures," said Roland, "mean so much; in this
elemental way they mean money. And money
means&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Figures over again," Hester said, with a certain
weary disdain. It was not possible that this alone
could be the tragic danger, the burden of the soul
that Edward meant. But Roland was thinking his
own thoughts, and interpreted her comments in a
way of his own.</p>

<p>"It means most things in this world," he said;
"unfortunately, however high-minded we are, we
can do nothing without it. It means of course
show and luxury, and gaiety, and all the things you
despise; but at the same time&mdash;&mdash; It means," he
said, after a little pause, "the house which two
people could make into paradise. It means ease
of mind, so that a man can rise every day without
anxiety, knowing that he has enough for every
claim upon him. Ah! how can I say all that it
means&mdash;you would laugh, or be frightened. It
means the right to love, and the right to say it."
Roland was making use of all his well-worn artillery,
but of something more besides which he had not
quite understood the existence of&mdash;something which
lent a very eloquent tremor to his voice and doubled
the seduction of his eyes.</p>

<p>"Oh! I was not thinking of anything half so
sentimental," said Hester. She never looked at him,
to be affected by his glances, or paid any attention
to his voice. And yet there had been a moment
when Roland's departure made the world itself<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_113" id="Page_113">[Pg 113]</a></span>
shrink and look narrow: but she remembered
nothing about that now. "To tell the truth, all
I was thinking of was buying and selling," she said;
"for business means that, doesn't it? Of course I
suppose, as we must have money to live, you may
say that money is the first thing in life, more
necessary than bread; but I did not mean that."</p>

<p>Conversations which ended in this way were,
however, very little serviceable to Hester, for how
could she tell which of these mysteries of the craft
had entangled Edward, or if any of them could
justify the seriousness of his excitement, the tragic
sense of a possible catastrophe, the wild expedient
of flight, which had been in his words! All this
talk about the vicissitudes of money was too petty
to satisfy her mind as a reason. And still less was
that talk calculated to promote Roland's purpose,
who did not care very much what he was saying
so long as he could recommend himself to her
favourable opinion. What he wanted was to show
her that the future had large possibilities of advancement.
He wanted, without committing himself or
doing anything that could be afterwards commented
upon as "behaving badly," to leave upon Hester's
mind a delicate intimation that he meant to come
back, to speak more plainly, to say things more
worthy of her attention; and that she might be
able to make up her mind in the meantime and
not be taken by surprise. Roland was not so
romantic as to be unaware that the advantages
lay on his own side; he had solid gifts to give,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_114" id="Page_114">[Pg 114]</a></span>
and a position to offer, which could not be carelessly
considered by any person of sense. And he was
well aware that there was no crowd of candidates
contending for Hester's hand. She had to him the
air of a girl neglected, altogether out of the way of
forming any satisfactory engagements, almost painfully
divested of that "chance" which Emma looked
at with such sensible if matter-of-fact eyes. Roland,
to do him justice, was all the more willing to show
her a romantic devotion on this account, but it kept
him free from anxiety about his own hopes. There
had been Harry indeed&mdash;but she would not have
Harry. And Edward he was aware had paid her
furtive "attentions" at Ellen Merridew's parties;
but what could Edward do? He could not pay
serious addresses to any one, in his circumstances,
far less to Hester: and he was not the fellow to
marry a girl without money and under the cold
shade of Catherine's disfavour. This last was one
of the things that made Roland himself hesitate&mdash;but
he thought it might be got over. And there
could be no doubt that his mind had made great
strides towards making itself up during this
Christmas visit. But it was a short visit on the
whole, for he had not much time to spare for
pleasure, and his business had been summarily
ended. Emma thought it was owing to Hester's
interference that she was left behind, Reginald
Merridew having not yet "spoken;" but there
was in reality a certain sympathy in Roland's mind
with his sister's honest desire to be settled, and<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_115" id="Page_115">[Pg 115]</a></span>
there would be much convenience in it could it be
accomplished, he felt. He went away accordingly,
slightly depressed by Hester's indifferent farewell,
and remembering the look of over-clearness in her
eyes when he had gone away the first time with a
sort of fond regret. He was sure that day that she
had shed a few tears over his departure, of which
there was no appearance now. But soon he recovered
his spirits, asking himself to look the
situation in the face. Who else was there? What
rival could he have? There was nobody. She
was stranded in that old house as if it had been a
desolate island. And she could not be content to
vegetate there for ever, a girl of her spirit. There
was a practical element in Roland's character,
notwithstanding his romantic eyes.</p>

<p>And Hester was so ungrateful that his departure
was almost a relief to her. She forgot altogether
that she had cried the first time when he went
away, and she was glad to be set free from the
hope, which at the same time was a fear, of finding
out something about Edward's troubles from his
chance revelations. Her mind turned now with
unbroken eagerness to the sole means of intercourse
which she had with her lover, which could be calculated
upon with any freedom, which were Ellen's
parties&mdash;the <i>Th&eacute;s Dansantes</i>! It seemed incredible
that her entire existence should be concentrated in
a weekly assembly so frivolous, so thoughtless, and
nonsensical, and that all those grave and troublous
thoughts should seek interpretation in a dance. But<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_116" id="Page_116">[Pg 116]</a></span>
so it was. The first of them brought her only
disappointment, and that of a kind that she felt
almost maddening&mdash;for Edward did not appear.
He gave her no warning, which was cruel, and
when she found, after hours of waiting, that he
was not expected, the shock of resentment and
shame and dismay almost stunned her: but pride
carried the day. She threw herself into the current
with a sort of desperation, and held her place with
the gayest: then entered, sombre and silent, upon
another week of suspense. The second occasion
was not so bad. He was there, and appropriated
her as usual, and breathed hints into her ear which
kept her in a whirl of excitement.</p>

<p>"How can I explain to you," he said, "here?
And even if I could explain to you, I don't want
to do it, for it is all miserable trade, which you
would not understand&mdash;which I don't wish you
to understand."</p>

<p>"But I want to understand it, Edward. You
don't think how cruel it is to me to tell me just
so much, then leave me outside."</p>

<p>"Should I <i>not</i> have told you so much?" he said,
looking at her. "You are right. I believe you are
right, Hester; but my heart was running over, and
to no one else could I say a word. I could not put
a little bit of my burden upon any one but you.
I know it was selfish, dear."</p>

<p>"Oh, Edward; it is not that. I will bear your
burden; I am glad to help you; I would bear it all
for you if I could," she cried with her bright eyes<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_117" id="Page_117">[Pg 117]</a></span>
widening, her cheeks glowing with enthusiasm.
"Don't you <i>know</i> that I would bear it all if I
could? It is not that. But tell me, only tell me
a little more."</p>

<p>He shook his head.</p>

<p>"Hester," he said, "that is not what a man wants
in a woman; not to go and explain it all to her with
pen and ink, and tables and figures, to make her understand
as he would have to do with a man. What
he wants, dear, is very different&mdash;just to lean upon
you&mdash;to know that you sympathise, and think of
me, and feel for me, and believe in me, and that
you will share whatever comes."</p>

<p>Hester said nothing, but her countenance grew
very grave.</p>

<p>"Don't you think that a woman could do all that&mdash;and
yet that it would be easier for her if she
understood what it was, and why it was?" she said,
after a pause.</p>

<p>"Dear," said Edward, gazing at her with glowing
eyes. He was in a hopeful mood, and he allowed
himself to indulge the love and pleasure he felt in
her, having bound her to him with a chain more
fast than iron. "Darling! was it ever known that
a woman, a girl like you (if there ever was a girl
like my Hester), thought of what would be easiest?
And you who would bear it all, you said."</p>

<p>"So I should&mdash;gladly; but then I should
understand."</p>

<p>"My only love! understanding is nothing, it matters
nothing; another fellow, any man, a clerk in the<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_118" id="Page_118">[Pg 118]</a></span>
office, would understand. I want your sympathy. I
want&mdash;you."</p>

<p>"Oh, Edward!" she cried, "you have me and my
sympathy&mdash;even if you were wrong you should have my
sympathy. But is it just, is it good, do you think,
that you should ask all that and tell me nothing? I
am a woman, but I am not a fool. I can understand
most things. Try me&mdash;tell me&mdash;I will set my mind
to it. Sympathy that is ignorant cannot be so good
as sympathy that knows."</p>

<p>He made a little pause, and then he said, looking
at her, she felt, severely, with a scoff in his voice&mdash;</p>

<p>"And where is this explanation to take place?
Will you appoint to meet me somewhere with my
balance-sheet and my vouchers? Perhaps you will
come to my room at the bank? or appoint an accountant
whom you can trust?"</p>

<p>"Edward!" she drew her hand out of his arm and
then put it back again after a moment's hesitation,
"do you want me to look a wretch even to myself?
Why should you say all this? and why&mdash;why be so
unjust to me? You forget that when one knows
nothing one thinks all sorts of things, and invents a
hundred terrors. Tell me how it is in the general
not details. You do not want silly sympathy."</p>

<p>"I want all your sympathy, silly or not. I want
you. Hester, if we are to escape notice we must
dance like the rest; we cannot stand and talk all
night. And I am just in the mood for it!" he cried.</p>

<p>Many people no doubt have waltzed with very
little inclination for it, people who were both sad and<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_119" id="Page_119">[Pg 119]</a></span>
sorry, disappointed, heartbroken; but few more reluctant
than Hester, who felt her position intolerable,
and by whom the complacent injustice of it, the calm
assertion that such blind adherence was all that was
to be looked for from a woman, was more irritating
and offensive than can be described. Was it possible
that he thought so? that this was what she would
have to encounter in the life she should spend with
him? Her advice, her intelligent help, her understanding,
all ignored, and nothing wanted but a kind
of doggish fidelity, an unreasoning belief? Hester felt
it cruel to be made to dance even, to be spun through
the crowd as if in the merest caprice of gaiety while
at such a crisis of her fate.</p>

<p>But neither this nor their subsequent conversations
made any difference; the evening passed for her as
in a dream. Edward, who was not much of a dancer,
and seldom cared to perform these rites with any
partner but herself, danced repeatedly with others
that night, while Hester stood by looking on with
gathering bewilderment. She had a headache, she
said. It was her mother's way of getting free of
every embarrassment, and Hester was acquainted
with the expedient, though she had not hitherto
been tempted to use it. She sat by Mrs. Merridew,
the mother of the house, who was a kind
woman, and disposed to be good to her. "Just say
the word, my dear, and as soon as our carriage comes
I will take you home," this lady said; "for to sit
with a racking headache and watch other young folks
dancing is more than flesh and blood can bear." But<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_120" id="Page_120">[Pg 120]</a></span>
alas! Mrs. Merridew's carriage was not ordered till
two o'clock, and Hester had to bear her burden. And
of course it was not thus that the evening ended. He
came to seek her at Mrs. Merridew's side, and heard
the account of her headache with a sympathetic
countenance.</p>

<p>"This was our dance," he said; "but come into the
hall instead, where it is cool, and let me get you some
tea." He placed her there in the shelter of the evergreens,
when all the hubbub of the next dance was in full
progress. They were quiet, almost alone, and Edward
was in a fever of high spirits and excitement. He
had said little about love in that strange moment
when he had taken possession of her. Now he made
up for all deficiencies. She endeavoured at first to
bring him back to what she called the more important
subject. "Can any subject be more important?"
he said with tender reproach. And she was silenced,
for what could she say? And the moments flew too
fast and were too brief to be lost in any struggle.
They parted with a few mysterious words whispered
into her ear, which did much however to bring back
the painful tension which had relaxed a little in his
presence. "If I send to you, you will see me,
Hester?" he whispered. "You won't think of proprieties?
I might have to put your love to the test&mdash;to
ask you&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"What?" she cried with almost a spasm of alarm.
He gave her hand a warning clasp as he put her into
the fly, and then stooping to arrange the shawls
around her, kissed it secretly. And that was all. She<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_121" id="Page_121">[Pg 121]</a></span>
drove home in the silence and dark, feeling every
word thrill her through, going over it again and again.
What was this test of love that might be required of
her? What did he expect her to do for him, in
ignorance, in blind trust? Hester had too high a
spirit to accept this <i>r&ocirc;le</i> with ease. She was bewildered&mdash;dazzled
by the lavish outpouring of his love; but
all that did not blind her to the strange injustice of
this treatment, the cruelty of her helpless position.
For what could she do? She could not desert him in
his hour of need; if he made this call upon her which
he spoke of so mysteriously, it would no doubt be in
his utmost need, when to desert him would be like
a traitor. And Hester knew that she could confront
any danger with him or for him&mdash;but what was it?
A dilemma so terrible had never presented itself to
her imagination. There was a cruelty in it, a depreciation
of all the nobler parts of her, as if only in ignorance
could she be trusted. Her mother's questions
about the ball, and whether she had danced much,
and who her partners had been, were insupportable,
as insupportable as the maunderings of Emma. In
short, if there was anything that could have made
this mystery and darkness in which her way seemed
lost, more hard to bear, it was the background of
amusement and supposed light-heartedness against
which it was set. "My head ached," she said. "I
scarcely danced at all," by way of freeing herself;
but this opened only another kind of torture, for
poor Mrs. John, well used to the feminine indulgence
of headaches, had a whole surgery of little<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_122" id="Page_122">[Pg 122]</a></span>
remedies, and bathed her child's forehead, and drew
back her hair, and would have administered sal-volatile,
tea, eau-de-cologne&mdash;there was no telling
how many cures&mdash;if she had been allowed.</p>

<p>"Let me fan you then, my love: sometimes that
does me a great deal of good. Just let me pour a
little eau-de-cologne first; you don't know how
cooling it is."</p>

<p>"Oh, mamma! let me be still; let me be in the
dark; go to bed, and don't mind me," cried Hester.</p>

<p>"My love! how could I do that and leave my
child to suffer," said Mrs. John, heroically&mdash;and it
was heroic, for the night was cold, the fire burning
low, the hour three o'clock. Hester, with her brain
throbbing, all inaccessible to eau-de-cologne, did not
know how to free her mother from this too generous
unnecessary martyrdom. She began to talk to
break the spell.</p>

<p>"Emma is very happy," she said, "she danced with
Edward Vernon. She thinks perhaps it may make
the other speak, or that even Edward himself&mdash;"
Hester broke off with a quiver in her lip. "I am
becoming malicious like the rest," she said.</p>

<p>"That is not malicious, dear," said Mrs. John.
"Emma is very amusing, being so frank, but she is
right enough when you come to think of it; for what
can she do if she does not marry? And I am sure
Edward Vernon, though Catherine makes such a fuss
about him, is nothing so very great. I wonder what
he meant coming here that one night, and so late."</p>

<p>"It was by accident," Hester said.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_123" id="Page_123">[Pg 123]</a></span></p>

<p>"It was a very odd accident," cried her mother,
"no one else ever did so."</p>

<p>"He had been sitting late over his work, and his
head was very full of&mdash;business."</p>

<p>Mrs. John looked in all the confidence of superior
wisdom into her daughter's face. A smile dawned
upon her lips.</p>

<p>"Perhaps you think he was coming to confide his
troubles about his business, Hester, to you and
me."</p>

<p>"And why not?" said Hester, raising herself from
her bed.</p>

<p>Mrs. John dropped her fan in her surprise, and sat
down abruptly upon the little chair by Hester's
bedside, to her daughter's great relief.</p>

<p>"Why not?" she said. "I think, though you are
my own, that you are the strangest girl I ever knew.
Do you think a man <i>ever</i> talks to women about these
things? Oh, perhaps to a woman like Catherine
that is the same as a man. But to anybody he
cares for&mdash;never, oh, never, dear! I suppose he has
a respect for you and me; think of any man venturing
to bring business into my drawing-room, though
it is only a poor little parlour now, not a drawing-room
at all. Oh, no, that could never&mdash;never be! In
all my life I never descended so low as that," Mrs.
John said, with dignity. "I used to be brought into
contact with a great many business people when your
poor dear papa was living; but they never talked
'shop,' as they call it, before me."</p>

<p>"But my father himself?" said Hester, her eyes<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_124" id="Page_124">[Pg 124]</a></span>
blazing with the keenest interest; "you knew all his
affairs?"</p>

<p>Mrs. John held her delicate little hands clasped for
a moment, and then flung them apart, as if throwing
the suspicion away.</p>

<p>"Never!" she cried; "he respected me too much.
Your poor papa was incautious about money, Hester,
and that has done a great deal of harm to both
of us, for we are poor, and we ought to have
been rich; but he always had too much respect for
me to mix me up with business. You are very inexperienced,
my dear, or you would know that such a
thing could not be."</p>

<p>Hester followed her mother with her large eyes,
with a wondering wide gaze, which answered well
enough for that of believing surprise, almost awe,
which Mrs. John was very willing to recognise as a
suitable expression. And there was indeed a sort of
awe in the girl's perception of her mother's perfectly
innocent, perfectly assured theory of what was right
in women. What wonder that a man should think
so, when women themselves thought so? This
strange discovery composed and stilled her when at
last she was left in the dark and in peace.</p>

<p>Hester kept gazing through that wintry blackness,
with eyes still wide open, and her clear brows
puckered with wonder and alarm. Was it natural,
then, a thing she could accept as just, that it was
enough for her to sympathise, to share the consequences,
to stand by the chief actor whatever happened,
but never to share in the initiative or have<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_125" id="Page_125">[Pg 125]</a></span>
any moral concern in the motive or the means of
what was done? A sense of helplessness began to
take the place of indignation in her mind. Was
that what they called the natural lot of women? to
suffer, perhaps to share the blame, but have no
share in the plan, to sympathise, but not to know;
to move on blindly according to some rule of loyalty
and obedience, which to any other creature in the
world would be folly and guilt? But her mother
knew nothing of such hard words. To her this was
not only the right state of affairs, but to suggest any
better rule was to fail in respect to the lady whose
right it was to be left ignorant. Hester tried to
smile when she recalled this, but could not, her heart
being too sore, her whole being shaken. <i>He</i> thought
so too perhaps, everybody thought so, and she alone,
an involuntary rebel, would be compelled to accept
the yoke which, to other women, was a simple
matter, and their natural law. Why, then, was she
made unlike others, or why was it so?</p>

<p>Edward had been in great spirits that night. The
next time they met was in the afternoon late, when
Hester was returning from a visit to Mrs. Morgan.
It was nearly dark, and it startled her to see him
standing waiting for her under one of the trees past
the gate of the Heronry. She went slowly, somewhat
reluctantly, to join him on the sign just discernible
in the dark which he made her. He caught
her hand quickly, as she came up, and drew it
within his arm.</p>

<p>"You have been so long with that old woman, and<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_126" id="Page_126">[Pg 126]</a></span>
I have wanted you so," he cried, leading her away
along the deserted country road, which struck off
at right angles with the Common. "Couldn't you
divine that I wanted you? Didn't you know by
instinct I was longing for consolation?"</p>

<p>"Oh, Edward! what is wrong? What has made
so great a change in you?" she cried.</p>

<p>He drew her arm closer and closer through his,
and leaned upon her as if his appeal for support was
physical too.</p>

<p>"I told you it was too long to explain," he said;
"it is all the worry of business. Sometimes things
seem going well, and then I am top-gallant high, and
vex you with my levity, as the other night&mdash;you know
you were vexed the other night: and then things
turn badly, and I am low, low down in the depths,
and want my love to comfort me. Oh, if you only
belonged to me, Hester, and we had a home somewhere
where I could go in to you and say 'Console
me!'"</p>

<p>"But Edward, your business never used to be a
fever and an excitement like this."</p>

<p>"How do you know? I did not dare to come to
you; and you were a child then. Ah, but you are
quite right, Hester; it was different. But a man
cannot vegetate for ever. I endured it as long as I
could. Now it is all on a turn of the cards, and I
may be able to face the world to-morrow, and have
my own way."</p>

<p>"On a turn of the cards! Edward, you cannot
mean it is play? You are not a&mdash;gambler?"<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_127" id="Page_127">[Pg 127]</a></span>
Hester gave a little convulsive cry, clutching him by
the arm with both her hands.</p>

<p>He laughed. "Not with cards, certainly," he said.
"I am a respectable banker, my darling, and very
knowing in my investments, with perhaps a taste for
speculation&mdash;but that nobody has brought home to
me yet. It is a very legitimate way of making a
fortune, Hester. It is only when you lose that it
becomes a thing to blame."</p>

<p>"Do you mean speculation, Edward?"</p>

<p>"Something of that sort; a capital horse when it
carries you over the ford&mdash;and everything that is
bad when you lose."</p>

<p>"But do you mean&mdash;tell me&mdash;that it is simple
speculation&mdash;that this is all that makes you anxious?"
Hester had never heard that speculation was immoral,
and her mind was relieved in spite of herself.</p>

<p>"Only&mdash;simple speculation! Good Lord! what
would she have?" he cried, in a sort of unconscious
aside, with a strange laugh; then added, with mock
gravity, "that's all, my darling; not much, is it?
You don't think it is worth making such a fuss
about?"</p>

<p>"I did not say that," said Hester, gravely, "for I
don't understand it, nor what may be involved; but
it cannot touch the heart. I was afraid&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Of something much worse," he said, with the
same strange laugh. "What were you afraid of?&mdash;tell
me. You did not think I was robbing the
bank, or killing Catherine?"</p>

<p>"Edward!"&mdash;she did not like these pleasantries&mdash;"why<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_128" id="Page_128">[Pg 128]</a></span>
do you talk so wildly? Come in with me,
and my mother will give you some tea."</p>

<p>"I want you, and not any tea. I should like to
take you up in my arms, and carry you away&mdash;away&mdash;where
nobody could know anything about us
more. I should like to disappear with you, Hester,
and let people suppose we were dead or lost, or
whatever they pleased."</p>

<p>"I wonder," said Hester, "why you should have
lived so long close to me, and never found out that
you wanted me so much till now. Oh, don't laugh so!
You have always been very cool, and quite master
of yourself, till now."</p>

<p>"It was time enough, it appears, when you make
so little response," he said; "but all that is very
simple if you but knew. I had to keep well with
so many. Now that it is all on a turn of the dice,
and a moment may decide everything, I may venture
to think of myself."</p>

<p>"Dice! What you say is all about gambling,
Edward."</p>

<p>"So it is, my sweetest. It is a trick I have got.
Chance is everything in business&mdash;luck, whatever
that may be: so that gambling words are the only
words that come natural. But don't leave the talking
to me; you can talk better than I can; you are not
a silent angel. Tell me something, Hester. Tell me
what you thought that night. Tell me what this
little heart is saying now."</p>

<p>Hester was not touched by that reference to her
little heart, which was not a little heart, but a great<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_129" id="Page_129">[Pg 129]</a></span>
one, bounding wildly in her breast with perplexity
and pain, as well as love, but ready for any heroic
effort.</p>

<p>"If I were to tell you perhaps you would not like
it, Edward. It makes me happy that you should
want me, and lean on me, and give me your burden
to bear; but I want so much more. Perhaps I am
not so gentle as women ought to be. My mother
would be content, but I am not. I want to know
everything, to help you to think, to understand it
all. And besides, Edward&mdash;&mdash;No, one thing is
enough; I will not say that."</p>

<p>"Yes, say everything; it is all sweet from you."</p>

<p>"Then, Edward, come home and let my mother
know. She will betray nobody. We ought not to
meet in the dark like two&mdash;&mdash;to send little hidden
notes. We are responsible to the people who love us.
We ought to be honest&mdash;to mamma, to Catherine
Vernon."</p>

<p>"We ought to go and hand in the banns, perhaps,"
he said, with sudden bitterness, "like two&mdash;honest
shopkeepers, as you say. Catherine Vernon would
give me away. And is this all you know of love,
Hester?&mdash;it is the woman's way, I suppose&mdash;congratulations,
wedding presents, general triumph over
everybody. How should you understand me when I
speak of disappearing with my love, getting lost,
dying even, if it were together&mdash;?"</p>

<p>There was a pause, for Hester was wounded, yet
touched, both to the heart. She said, after a moment,
almost under her breath, "I can understand that<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_130" id="Page_130">[Pg 130]</a></span>
too." The faltering of her voice, the droop of her
head, and his own need for her, more urgent than
either, changed Edward's sarcastic mood. He drew
her closer to him, and put down his face close to
her ear.</p>

<p>"We must not fight," he said, "my only love. I
am going away, and I can't quarrel with you, my
only love! And I am your only love. There has
never been anybody between us. I will come back
in two or three days; but Hester, another time, if it
should be for good, would you come?&mdash;you would
come?&mdash;with me?"</p>

<p>"Elope!" she said, breathless, her eyes large in
the darkness, straining upon the face which was too
near her own to be very clear.</p>

<p>He laughed. "If you like the word; it is an
innocent word. Yes, elope then," he said.</p>

<p>"But why?&mdash;but why? It would wound them all&mdash;it
would break their hearts; and for what reason?"
Hester cried.</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_131" id="Page_131">[Pg 131]</a></span></p>




<h2><a name="CHAPTER_VII" id="CHAPTER_VII">CHAPTER XXXVII.</a></h2>

<h3>ALARMS.</h3>


<p>Edward was about a week away from home. He
had often been away before, and his absence had
caused no particular commotion: but now it affected
a good many people. To Catherine, if it were
possible, it might be said to have been a certain
relief. He and she had got over that explanation
when she had intended to say so many things to him,
and had found the words taken out of her mouth.
All things had gone on again in their usual way. But
the suspicion which he had supposed to exist so long
without any reason now had actually arisen in her
mind. She showed it less than he had supposed her
to show it when she had no such feeling. She was
on her guard. She did not worry him any longer by
her old affectionate way of going to the window to
watch him when he went out; that had been simple
love, admiration of his orderly, regular ways, pleasure
in the sight of him: but somehow instinctively since
she had begun to doubt she came to perceive the<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_132" id="Page_132">[Pg 132]</a></span>
interpretation he had put upon it, and she did it no
longer. But at night when all was still in the house
and Edward down stairs at work in his room, or
supposed to be at work, if any sound of the door
closing echoed upwards, Catherine would steal behind
the curtains and watch if it was he who was going
out, and which way he took. She believed him, of
course; but yet there was always in her soul a wish
to ask&mdash;was he really, really sure that he was true?
Doubts like these are beyond the power of any but
the sternest self-command to crush, and Catherine
was capable of that in his presence. She would not
betray her anxiety to him: but when he was not
there no such effort was necessary, and she betrayed
it freely, to the silence, to the night, when there was
nobody to see.</p>

<p>And her thoughts had travelled fast and far since
that evening. She had no longer any doubt that he
loved somebody, and she had made up her mind that
it was Hester who was the object of his love. This
had caused her perhaps the greatest mental conflict
she had ever known in her life&mdash;for her life had this
good thing in it, that it had been wonderfully free
from struggle. She had been the arbiter of all
things in her little world, and nobody had made any
actual stand against her will. Many pretences had
surrounded her, feigned assents and furtive oppositions,
but nobody had stood out against her. It was
a great wonder to her that he or any one should do
so now (though he did not: he had opposed her
in nothing, nor ever said a word from which it could<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_133" id="Page_133">[Pg 133]</a></span>
be inferred that he rejected or questioned Catherine's
sway), but with all her natural strength of mind she
set herself to reconsider the question. If she disliked
Hester before, if for all these years the bright-eyed,
all-observant girl, mutely defiant of her, had been a
sort of Mordecai to Catherine, it is not to be supposed
that she could easily receive her into favour now.
Her parentage, her looks, her mind, her daring setting
up of her own personality as a child, as if she were
something important, had all exasperated Catherine.
Even the consciousness of her own prejudice, of the
folly of remembering against a girl the follies of
her childhood, helped to aggravate this sentiment;
nor was it likely that the fact that this girl was
Edward's chosen love should make her heart softer.
She said to herself that she could not endure Hester;
but yet she prepared herself for the inevitable from
the first day. Perhaps she thought it well to propitiate
fate by going to the very furthest length at
once, and forecasting all that the most evil fortune
could bring her.</p>

<p>It cost her a sharp and painful struggle. No one
knew what was going on in her mind in those wintry
days of the early year: her preoccupation was
attributed to other things: afterwards, when events
seemed to account for it, her wonderful prevision was
admired and wondered at. But in reality the previsions
in Catherine's mind were all of one kind. She
saw a series of events happen in succession, as to
which she was as confident as if they were past
already; and in her imagination she did the only<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_134" id="Page_134">[Pg 134]</a></span>
thing that nobody expected of her, the thing which
fate did not demand of her&mdash;she made up her mind
that she would make no stand against this hateful
thing. What was the use of it? If the young but
held out, even the most unwise and the most cruel,
they must win in the end. It would not be for her
dignity, she said to herself, to stand out. She would
make no opposition to Edward's choice. The separation
that must ensue she would bear as she could&mdash;with
dignity at least if nothing else. The elevation
of her enemy and her enemy's house she must submit
to. She would withdraw, she would have no hand in
it; but at least she would not oppose. This, by dint
of a hard fight, Catherine obtained of herself. She
would say nothing, forestall nothing, but at the same
time oppose nothing. All the long hours which a
lonely woman must spend by herself she appropriated
to this. She must lose Edward; had she not lost
him now? He had been her sole weakness, her one
delusion; and it was not, she said to herself, a delusion&mdash;the
boy had loved her and been true to her. He
had made her happy like a mother with a true son.
But when that vagrant sentiment comes in which is
called love (the fools! as if the appropriation of the
name to one kind of affection, and that the most
selfish of all, was not a scorn to love, the real, the
all-enduring!) what was previous virtue, what was
truth, and gratitude, and everything else in life, in
comparison? Of course they must all give place to
the fascination of a pair of shining eyes. Father
and mother, and home and duty, what were they in<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_135" id="Page_135">[Pg 135]</a></span>
comparison? Everybody was aware of that, and the
old people struggled often enough as was well known.
Sometimes they appealed to heaven and earth, sometimes
were hysterical and made vows and uttered
curses. But in the long run the battle was to the
young ones. They had time and passion, and
universal human sympathy, on their side, whereas
the old people had none of all these, neither time to
wait, nor passion to inspire, nor sympathy anywhere
in heaven or earth. Catherine said to herself proudly
that she would not expose herself to the pity which
attends the vanquished. She would retire from the
fray. She would clothe herself in double armour of
stoicism, and teach herself to see the humour in this
as in so many things. Was not seeing the humour
of it the last thing that remained to the noble soul
amid the wonder of life?</p>

<p>Her sense, however, of this great downfall which
was approaching, and in which she meant to enact
so proud and magnanimous a part, was so strong and
bitter that Edward's absence was a relief to her.
She expected every day that he would present
himself before her, and burst forth into some agitated
statement&mdash;a statement which she would not
help out with a word, but which she would receive,
not as he would expect her to receive it, with opposition
and wrath, but with the calm of one who knew
all about it, and had made up her mind to it long
ago. But when he was absent she felt that here
was a respite. She was freed from the eager desire
she had, against her will, to know what he was doing,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_136" id="Page_136">[Pg 136]</a></span>
where he went, who he was with, which tormented
her, but which she could not subdue. All this
ferment of feeling was stilled when he was away.
She did not ask why he should go away so often,
what the business was that called him to London.
For the first time in her life she was overmastered
by a conflict of individual feeling; and she was glad
when there came a lull in it, and when the evil day
was postponed. She went on seeing her friends,
visiting and being visited, keeping a fair face to the
world all the time. But it began to be whispered
in Redborough that Catherine Vernon was beginning
to fail, that there were signs in her of breaking up,
that she began to show her age. People began to
ask each other about her. "Have you seen Catherine
Vernon lately? How did you think she was
looking?" and to shake their heads. Some said she
had been so strong a woman always, and had taken
so much out of herself, that probably the break-up
would be speedy if it was true that she was beginning
to break up; while others held more hopefully
that with her wonderful constitution she might yet
rally, and see twenty-years of comfort yet. The fact
was that she was not ill at all. It seemed to herself
that she was more keenly alive, more highly strung
to every use of existence than ever. She saw better,
heard more quickly, having every sense on the alert.
Nothing had so quickened her and stimulated her
powers for years. She was eager for every new day
which might carry some new crisis in it. She did
not even feel the deadly chill of Edward's desertion<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_137" id="Page_137">[Pg 137]</a></span>
for the intense occupation which the whole matter
brought her. And then, though she said to herself
it was certain, yet it was not so certain after all.
It might turn out that she was mistaken yet.
There was still an outlet for a secret hope. Sometimes
indeed a flattering unction was laid to her
heart, a feeling that if it is only the unforeseen that
happens, the so carefully thought out, so elaborately
calculated upon, might not happen. But this Catherine
only permitted herself by rare moments. For
the most part she felt very sure of the facts, and
almost solemnly cognisant of what was to come.</p>

<p>In this way the spring went on. It had appeared
to Edward himself as certain that some great <i>coup</i>
must have settled his fate long before. It was his
inexperience, perhaps, and the excitement of his
determination to act for himself, which had made
everything appear so imminent; but after all it did
not turn out so. The course of events went on in
that leisurely current which is far more deadly in its
sweep than any sudden cataract. He did not lose or
gain anything in a moment, his ventures either did
not turn out so vast as he imagined, or they were
partial failures, partial successes. Step by step he
went on, sacrificing, jeopardising, gradually, slowly,
without being himself aware of what he was doing,
the funds he had under his control. He had been
ready in the first passion of his desire for wealth to
risk everything and finish the whole matter at one
swoop; but that passed over, and he was not really
aware how one by one his counters were being swept<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_138" id="Page_138">[Pg 138]</a></span>
out of his hands. It went on through all the
awakening time of the year, as it might have gone
on for half a life time, and he was impatient of the
delay. Besides, this new accompaniment, this love
which he would not have suffered himself to indulge
had he not believed everything on the eve of a crisis,
became a great addition to his difficulties when the
crisis did not come. The habit of resorting to
Hester was one which grew upon him. But the
opportunities of indulging in it were few, for he was
as anxious not to betray himself nor to let Catherine
suspect what was going on, as at the beginning, when
he believed that all would be over in a week or two.
And Hester herself was not a girl with whom it was
easy to carry on a clandestine intercourse. The
situation chafed her beyond endurance. She had
almost ceased now to think of the mystery in which
he hid his proceedings, or to rebel against the interest
and sympathy which he demanded from her blindly,
out of the keen humiliation and distress which it
cost her to feel that she was deceiving her friends
and the world, conspiring with him to deceive
Catherine. This consciousness made Hester disagreeable
to live with, an angry, resentful, impatient
woman, absorbed in her own affairs, little accessible
to the world. Her mother could not understand
what had come to her, and still less could the old
Morgans, who loved and had understood her so
completely, understand. She avoided them now, she
cared for nobody. Week by week with a joyless
regularity she went to Ellen Merridew's dances, where<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_139" id="Page_139">[Pg 139]</a></span>
half the evening at least was spent with Edward in
a curious duel of mingled love and dislike&mdash;yes,
sometimes hatred almost. It seemed to her that her
distaste for everything that was going on was more
than her love could balance, that she so hated the
expedients he drove her to, that he himself took
another aspect in her eyes. Sometimes she felt that
she must make the crisis which he had so often
anticipated, and instead of consenting to fly with
him must fly by herself, and cut the tie between
them with a sharp stroke. It was all pain, trouble,
misery&mdash;and what was worse, falsehood, wherever
she turned. As the year slid round into sunshine,
and the days grew longer, everything became intolerable
to Hester. His absence was no relief to her.
She had his secret to keep whether he was there
or away, or rather her secret: for nothing she felt
could be so dreadful to her as the secresy in which
her own life was wrapped, and which he was terrified
she should betray.</p>

<p>And though it was now nearly six months after
Christmas, Emma Ashton still lived with the old
Morgans, and pursued her adventures with her bow
and spear in the dances and entertainments of the
neighbourhood. Reginald Merridew so far from
"speaking" had been sent off by his father to
America, professedly on business, but, as was well
known in the family, to put a stop to the nonsense
which at his age was so utterly out of the question;
and though other expectations had stirred her from
time to time, nothing had given certainty to her<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_140" id="Page_140">[Pg 140]</a></span>
hopes of being settled. She was going home at last,
to Roland, in the beginning of June, and the old
people were looking forward to their deliverance with
no small impatience. Emma never failed at the
<i>Th&eacute;s Dansantes</i>. The old fly with the white horse
rumbled along in the dusk of the early summer
nights and mornings, carrying these two young
women to and fro almost as regularly as the Thursday
came&mdash;Hester reluctant, angry, and pale, obeying
a necessity which she resented to the very depths of
her being; Emma placid, always with a certain sense
of pleasure animating her business-like arrangements.
Catherine, who did not sleep very well on these
nights, got to recognise the sound, and would sometimes
look out from her window and wonder bitterly
whether <i>that girl</i> too was glancing out, perhaps with
triumph in her eyes as she passed the shut-up house,
thinking of the day when it would be her own. It
gave her a little pleasure on the first of June when
she heard the slow vehicle creeping by to think that
Edward had been called away that afternoon, and
that if Hester had expected to meet him she would
be disappointed. That was a little consolation to
her. She heard it creeping back again about one in
the morning, earlier than usual, with a satisfied smile.
There had been no billing and cooing that evening,
no advance made towards the final triumph. She
thought there was a sound of disappointment even
in the rumble of the fly; and so indeed there might
have been, for Emma was sobbing, and discoursing
among her tears upon the sadness of her prospects.<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_141" id="Page_141">[Pg 141]</a></span>
It was the last <i>Th&eacute; Dansante</i> to which Emma could
hope to go. "And here I'm going just as I came,"
Emma said, "though I had such a good opening, and
everybody has been so kind to me. I can't say here
that it has been for want of having my chance. I
have been introduced to the best people, and grandmamma
has given me two new dresses, and you have
never grudged me the best partners, I will say that
for you, Hester; and yet it has come to nothing! I
am sure I sha'n't be able to answer Roland a word
if he says after this that balls are an unnecessary
expense&mdash;for it is not much I have made by them.
To think that not one single gentleman in all
Redborough&mdash;&mdash;! Oh, Hester, either Elinor and
Bee tell awful stories of what happened to them, or
things have changed dreadfully, quite dreadfully,
since their day!"</p>

<p>Hester could find no words in which to console
this victim of the times. She listened indeed somewhat
sternly, refusing compassion. "To be sure,
there was poor Reginald, it was not his fault," Emma
sobbed. "If I should live to be a hundred I never
should believe it was his fault. But, after all, he
was very young, and he could have had no money to
speak of, and what should I have done with him?
So perhaps that was for the best. But then there
was Dr. Morris, whom I could have got on with; that
was his mother's doing:&mdash;ladies are always jealous,
don't you think?&mdash;and I should not have minded
that Captain Sedgely, that volunteer captain. But
it is of no use talking, for this is my last Thursday.<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_142" id="Page_142">[Pg 142]</a></span>
Oh, you don't mind; you have a good home, and a
mother, and everything you can desire. There is no
hurry about you."</p>

<p>Hester made no reply. It seemed to her that she
would be willing to change lives even with Emma, to
fall to her petty level, and estimate the chances of
being settled, and count the men whom she could
have managed to get on with, rather than carry on
such an existence as hers. It was no glance of
triumph, but one of humiliation, that she had cast, as
they passed, upon the shuttered windows and close-drawn
white draperies at the Grange. In her imagination
she stole into the very bedchamber where
Catherine had smiled to think of her disappointment,
and delivered her soul of her secret. "I am not
ashamed that we love each other: but I am ashamed
that we have concealed it," she imagined herself
saying. She was very unhappy; there seemed no
consolation for her anywhere. Edward had warned
her in a hurried note that he was called to town. "I
think it is coming at last," he said. "I think we
have made the grand <i>coup</i> at last." He had said it
so often that she had no faith in him; and how long
was it to go on like this&mdash;how long?</p>

<p>Meanwhile the house of the young Merridews was
still ringing with mirth and music. There was no
restraint, or reserve, or prudence or care-taking, from
garret to basement. Algernon, the young husband
who was now a father as well, had perhaps taken a
little more champagne than usual in honour of his
wife's first re-appearance after that arrival. She was<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_143" id="Page_143">[Pg 143]</a></span>
so brave, so "plucky," they all said, so unconventional,
that she had insisted on the <i>Th&eacute;s Dansantes</i> going on
all the same, though she was unable to preside over
them, and was still up, a little pale but radiant with
smiles, at the last supper-table when every one was
gone. Harry had been looking very grave all the
evening. He had even attempted a little lecture
over that final family supper. "If I were you, Algy
and Nell," he said, "I'd draw in a little now. You've
got your baby to think of&mdash;save up something for
that little beggar, don't spend it all on a pack of
fools that eat you up."</p>

<p>"Oh, you old Truepenny," Ellen said, without
knowing what she meant, "you are always preaching.
Hold your tongue, Algy, you have had too
much wine; you ought to go to bed. If I can't
stand up for myself it's strange to me. Who are
you calling a pack of fools, Harry? It's the only
thing I call society in Redborough. All the other
houses are as stiff as Spaniards. There is nobody
but me to put a little life into them. They were all
dead-alive before. If there's a little going on now I
think it's all owing to me."</p>

<p>"She is a wonderful little person is Nell," cried
her husband, putting a half-tipsy arm round her.
"She has pluck for anything. To think she should
carry on just the same, to let the rest have their
pleasure when she was up stairs. I am proud of her,
that is what I am. I am proud&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Oh, go to bed, Algy! If you ever do this again
I will divorce you. I won't put up with you. Harry,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_144" id="Page_144">[Pg 144]</a></span>
shut up," said the young mistress of the house,
who was fond of slang. "I can look after my own
affairs."</p>

<p>"And as for the money," said Algy, with a jovial
laugh, "I don't care a &mdash;&mdash; for the money. Ned's
put me up to a good thing or two. Ned's not very
much on the outside, but he's a famous good fellow.
He's put me up," he said, with a nod and broad smile
of good humour, "to two&mdash;three capital things."</p>

<p>"Ned!" cried Harry, almost with a roar of terror
and annoyance, like the cry of a lion. "Do you mean
to say you've put yourself in Ned's hands?"</p>

<p>Upon which Ellen jumped up, red with anger, and
pushed her husband away. "Oh, go to bed, you
stupid!" she cried.</p>

<p>Harry had lost all his colour; his fair hair and
large light moustache looked like shadows upon his
whiteness. "For God's sake, Ellen!" he said; "did
you know of this?"</p>

<p>"Know of what?&mdash;it's nothing," she cried. "Yes,
of course I know about it. I pushed him into it&mdash;he
knows I did. What have you got to do with
where we place our money? You may be sure we
sha'n't want you to pay anything for us," she said.</p>

<p>Harry had never resented her little impertinences;
he had always been submissive to her. He shook
his head now more in sorrow than in anger. "Let's
hope you won't want anybody to pay for you," he
said, and kissed his sister and went away.</p>

<p>Harry had never been in so solemn a mood before.
The foolish young couple were a little awed by it,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_145" id="Page_145">[Pg 145]</a></span>
but at last Ellen found an explanation. "It's ever
since he was godfather to baby. He thinks he will
have to leave all his money to him," she said; and
the incident ended in one of Algy's usual bursts of
laughter over his wife's <i>bons mots</i>.</p>

<p>Harry, however, took the matter a great deal more
seriously; he got little or no sleep that night. In
the morning he examined the letters with an alarmed
interest. Edward was to be back that evening, it
was expected, and there was a mass of his letters on
his desk with which his cousin did not venture to
interfere. Edward had a confidential clerk, who
guarded them closely. "Mr. Edward did not think
there would be anything urgent, anything to trouble
you about," he said, following Harry into the room
with unnecessary anxiety. "I can find that out for
myself," Harry said, sharply, turning upon this furtive
personage. But he did not meddle with any of the
heap, though it was his right to do so. They frightened
him, as though there had been infernal
machines inside, as indeed he felt sure enough
there were&mdash;not of the kind which tear the flesh
and fibre, but the mind and soul. When he went
back to his room he received a visit very unexpectedly
from the old clerk, Mr. Rule, with whom
Hester had held so long a conversation on the
night of the Christmas party. It was his habit to
come now and then, to patronise everybody, from the
youngest clerks to the young principals, shaking his
white head and describing how things used to be "in
John Vernon's time." Usually nobody could be more<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_146" id="Page_146">[Pg 146]</a></span>
genial and approving than old Rule. He liked to
tell his story of the great crisis, and to assure them
that, thanks to Miss Catherine, such dangers were no
longer possible. "A woman in the business just
once in a way, in five or six generations," he thought
an admirable institution. "She looks after all the
little things that you young gentlemen don't think
worth your while," he said. But to-day Mr. Rule
was not in this easy way of thinking. He wanted to
know how long Edward had been gone, and where he
was, and when he was expected back? He told
Harry that things were being said that he could not
bear to hear. "What is he doing away so often?
Is it pleasure? is it horse-racing, or that sort of
thing? Forgive me, Mr. Harry, but I'm so anxious
I don't know what I'm saying. You have always
taken it easy, I know, and left the chief management
to Mr. Edward. But you must act, sir, you must act,"
the old clerk said.</p>

<p>Harry's face had a sort of tragic helplessness in it.
"He's coming back to-night&mdash;one day can't matter
so much. Oh, no, it's not horse-racing, it's business.
Edward isn't the sort of fellow&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"One day may make all the difference," cried the
old man, but the more fussy and restless he was, the
more profound became Harry's passive solemnity.
When he had got rid of the old clerk he sat for a
long time doing nothing, leaning his head in his
hands: and at last he jumped up and got his hat,
and declared that he was going out for an hour.
"Several gentlemen have been here asking for Mr.<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_147" id="Page_147">[Pg 147]</a></span>
Edward," he was told as he passed through the outer
office. "Mr. Merridew, sir, the old gentleman: Mr.
Pounceby: and Mr. Fish has just been to know for
certain when he will be back." Harry answered
impatiently what they all knew, that his cousin
would be at the bank to-morrow morning, and that
he himself would return within the hour. There
were some anxious looks cast after him as he went
away, the elder clerks making their comments. "If
Mr. Edward's headpiece, sir, could be put on Mr.
Harry's shoulders," one of them said. They had no
fear that <i>he</i> would be absent when there was any
need for him, but then, when he was present, what
could he do?</p>

<p>Harry went on with long strides past the Grange
to the Heronry; it was a curious place to go for
counsel. He passed Catherine sitting at her window,
she who once had been appealed to in a crisis and
had saved the bank. He did not suppose that things
were so urgent now, but had they been so he would
not have gone to Catherine. He thought it would
break her heart. She had never been very kind to
him, beyond the mere fact of having selected him
from among his kindred for advancement; but Harry
had a tender regard for Catherine, a sort of stolid
immovable force of gratitude. His heart melted as
he saw her seated in the tranquillity of the summer
morning in the window, looking out upon everything
with, he thought, a peaceful interest, the contemplative
pleasure of age. It was not so, but he thought
so&mdash;and it seemed to him that if he could but<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_148" id="Page_148">[Pg 148]</a></span>
preserve her from annoyance and disturbance, from
all invasion of rumour or possibility of doubt as to the
stability of Vernon's, that there was nothing he would
not endure. He made himself as small as he could,
and got under the shadow of the trees that she might
not observe him as he passed, and wonder what
brought him that way, and possibly divine the
anxiety that was in him. He might have spared
himself the trouble. Catherine saw him very well,
and the feeling that sprang up in her mind was
bitter derision, mixed with a kind of unkindly
pleasure. "If you think that <i>you</i> will get a look
from her, when she has <i>him</i> at her feet?" Catherine
said to herself, and though the idea that Hester had
<i>him</i> at her feet was bitter to her, there was a pleasure
in the contempt with which she felt Harry's
chances to be hopeless indeed. She was very ungrateful
for his kindness, thinking of other things,
quite unsuspicious of his real object. She smiled
contemptuously to see him pass in full midday when
he ought to have been at his work, but laughed, with
a little aside, thinking, poor Harry, he would never
set the Thames on fire, it did not matter very much
after all whether he was there or not. The master
head was absent, too often absent, but Edward had
everything so well in hand that it mattered the less.
"When he is settled he will not go away so often,"
she said to herself. What a change it would have
made in all her thoughts had she known the gloomy
doubts and terrors in Harry's mind, his alarmed sense
that he must step into a breach which he knew not<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_149" id="Page_149">[Pg 149]</a></span>
how to fill, his bewildered questionings with himself.
If Edward did not turn up that night there would be
nothing else for it, and what was he to do? He
understood the common course of business, and how
to judge in certain easy cases, but what to do in an
emergency he did not know. He went on to the
Heronry at a great rate, making more noise than any
one else would with the gate, and catching full in his
face the gaze of those watchful observers who belonged
to the place, Mr. Mildmay Vernon in the
summer-house with his newspaper, and the Miss
Vernon-Ridgways at their open window. He
thought they all rose at him like so many serpent-heads
erecting themselves with a dart and hiss.
Harry was so little fanciful that only an excited
imagination could have brought him to this.</p>

<p>Mrs. John was in the verandah, gardening&mdash;arranging
the pots in which her pelargoniums were
beginning to bloom. She would have had him stay
and help her, asking many questions about Ellen and
her baby which Harry was unable to answer.</p>

<p>"Might I speak to Hester?" he said. "I have
no time to stay; I would like to see her for a
moment."</p>

<p>"What is it?" cried Mrs. John. Harry's embarrassment,
she thought, could only mean one thing&mdash;a
sudden impulse to renew the suit which Hester
had been so foolish as to reject. She looked at him
kindly and shook her head. "She is in the parlour;
but I wouldn't if I were you," she said, her eyes
moist with sympathy. It was hard upon poor Harry<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_150" id="Page_150">[Pg 150]</a></span>
to be compelled thus to take upon himself the credit
of a second humiliation.</p>

<p>"I should like to see her, please," he answered,
looking steadfastly into Mrs. John's kind, humid eyes,
as she shook her head in warning.</p>

<p>"Well, my dear boy; she is in the parlour. I
wish&mdash;I wish&mdash;&mdash; But, alas! there is no change
in her, and I wouldn't if I were you."</p>

<p>"Never mind, a man can but have his chance,"
said magnanimous Harry. He knew that few men
would have done as much, and the sense of the
sacrifice he was making made his heart swell. His
pride was to go too; he was to be supposed to be
bringing upon himself a second rejection; but
"Never mind, it is all in the day's work," he said
to himself, as he went through the dim passages and
knocked at the parlour door.</p>

<p>Hester was sitting alone over a little writing-desk
on the table. She was writing hurriedly, and he
could see her nervous movement to gather together
some sheets of paper, and shut them up in her little
desk, when she found herself interrupted. She gave
a great start when she perceived who it was, and
sprang up, saying, "Harry!" breathlessly, as if she
expected something to follow. But at first Harry
was scarcely master of himself to speak. The girl
he loved, the one woman who had moved his dull,
good, tenacious heart&mdash;she whom, he thought, he
should be faithful to all his life, and never care for
another; but he knew that her start, her breathless
look, the colour that flooded her face, coming and<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_151" id="Page_151">[Pg 151]</a></span>
going, were not for him, but for some one else, and
that his question would plunge her into trouble too;
that he would be to her henceforth as an emissary of
evil, perhaps an enemy. All this ran through his
mind as he stood looking at her and kept him silent.
And when he had gathered himself together his
mission suddenly appeared to him so extraordinary,
so presumptuous, that he did not know how to
explain it.</p>

<p>"You must be surprised to see me," he said,
hesitating. "I don't know what you will think.
You will understand I don't mean any impertinence,
Hester&mdash;or prying, or that sort of thing."</p>

<p>"I am sure you will mean to be kind, Harry; but
tell me quick&mdash;what is it?" she cried.</p>

<p>He sat down opposite, looking at her across the
table. "It is only from myself&mdash;nobody's idea but
mine; so you need not mind. It is just this, Hester,
in confidence. Do you know where Edward is? It
sounds impertinent, I know, but I don't mean it.
He's wanted so badly at the bank. If you could
give me an address where I could telegraph to him?
Don't be vexed; it is only that I am so stupid about
business. I can do nothing out of my own head."</p>

<p>"Is anything going wrong?" she cried, her lips
quivering, her whole frame vibrating, she thought,
with the beating, which was almost visible, of her
heart.</p>

<p>"Well, things are not very right, Hester. I don't
know how wrong they are. I've been kept out of it.
Oh, I suppose that was quite natural, for I am not<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_152" id="Page_152">[Pg 152]</a></span>
much good. But if I could but telegraph to him at
once, and make sure of getting him back&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"I think, Harry&mdash;I have heard&mdash;oh, I can't tell
you how! he is coming back to-night."</p>

<p>"Are you quite sure? I know he's expected, but
then&mdash;&mdash; So many things might happen. But if
he knew how serious it was all looking&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>Her look as she sat gazing at him was so terrible
that he never forgot it. He did not understand it
then, nor did he ever after fully understand it. The
colour had gone entirely out of her face; her eyes
stared at him as out of two deep, wide caves. It
was a look of wonder, of dismay, of guilt. "Is he
wanted&mdash;so much?" she said. Her voice was no
more than a whisper, and she gave a furtive glance
at the door behind her as if she were afraid some one
might hear.</p>

<p>"Oh, wanted&mdash;yes! but not enough to make you
look like that. Hester, if I had thought you'd
have felt it so! Good Lord, what can I do? I
thought you might have told me his address. Don't
mind, dear," cried the tender-hearted young man.
"I've no right to call you dear, but I can't help it.
If it's come to this, I'd do anything for him, Hester,
for your sake."</p>

<p>"Oh, never mind me, Harry&mdash;it is&mdash;nothing. I
have got no address: but I know&mdash;he's coming
to-night."</p>

<p>"Then that's all right," Harry said. "I wanted to
make sure of that. I don't suppose there is anything
to be frightened about so long as he is on the spot<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_153" id="Page_153">[Pg 153]</a></span>
you know&mdash;he that is the headpiece of the establishment.
He is such a clear-headed fellow, he sees
everything in a moment, and he has got everything
on his shoulders. It's not fair, I know. I must try
and shake myself up a little and take my share, and
not feel so helpless the moment Ned's away&mdash;that's
all," he said, getting up again restlessly. "I have
only given you a fright and made you unhappy; but
there's no reason for it, I assure you, Hester, so long
as Ned is to be here."</p>

<p>What he said did not comfort her at all, he could
see. Her face did not relax nor her eyes lose their
look of horror. He went away quite humbly, not
saying a word to Mrs. John, who on her part gave
him a silent, too significant, pathetic grasp of her
hand. Harry was half tempted to laugh, but a great
deal more to weep, as he went back again to Redborough.
He reflected that it was hard upon a fellow
to have to allow it to be supposed that he had offered
himself to a girl a second time when he was doing
nothing of the kind. But then he thought of Hester's
horrified look with a wonder and pain unspeakable,
not having the remotest idea what such a look might
mean. Anyhow, he concluded, Edward was coming
home. That was the one essential circumstance
after all.</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_154" id="Page_154">[Pg 154]</a></span></p>




<h2><a name="CHAPTER_VIII" id="CHAPTER_VIII">CHAPTER XXXVIII.</a></h2>

<h3>THE CRISIS.</h3>


<p>Hester sat still after Harry had left her as if she
had been frozen to stone. But stone was no fit
emblem of a frame which was tingling in every
nerve, or of a heart which was on fire with horror
and anguish and black bewilderment. The look
which Harry could not understand, which stopped
him in what he was saying, and which even now he
could not forget&mdash;was still upon her face. She was
contemplating something terrible enough to bring a
soul to pause, a strange and awful solution of her
mystery; and the first glance at it had stunned her.
When she had assured him that Edward was coming
back that night, a hurried note which she had
received that morning seemed to unfold itself in the
air before her, where she could read it in letters as
of fire. It was written on a scrap of paper blurred,
as if folded while the ink was still wet:&mdash;</p>

<p>"The moment has come that I have so long foreseen.
I am coming home to-morrow for a few hours.
Meet me at dusk under the holly at the Grange gate.<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_155" id="Page_155">[Pg 155]</a></span>
The most dangerous place is the safest; it must be
for ever or no more at all. Be ready, be calm, we
shall be together, my only love.&mdash;E. V."</p>

<p>This was how she knew that he was coming back.
God help her! She looked in Harry's face, with an
instantaneous realisation of the horror of it, of the
falsehood that was implied, of her own sudden complicity
in some monstrous wrong. "I know he is
coming home to-night." What was it that turned
Medusa into that mask of horror and gave her head
its fatal force? Was it the appalling vision of some
unsuspected abyss of falsehood and treachery suddenly
opening at her feet, over which she stood
arrested, turned into an image of death, blinding
and slaying every spectator who could look and see?
Hester did not know anything about classic story,
but she remembered vaguely about a face with
snaky locks that turned men to stone. She told
Harry the truth, yet it was a cruel lie. She herself,
though she knew nothing and was tortured with
terror and questionings, seemed to become at once
an active agent in the dark mystery, a liar, a traitor,
a false friend. Harry looked at her with concern
and wonder, seeing no doubt that she was pale, that
she looked ill, perhaps that she was unhappy, but
never divining that she was helping in a fatal deceit
against her will, contrary to her every desire. He did
not doubt for a moment what she said, or put any
meaning to it that was not simply in the words. He
never dreamt that Edward's return was not real, or
that it did not at once satisfy every question and set<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_156" id="Page_156">[Pg 156]</a></span>
things if not right, yet in the way of being right.
He drew a long breath of relief. That was all he
wanted to know. Edward once back again at the
head of affairs, everything would resume its usual
course. To hear him say "Then that's all right!"
and never to say a word, to feel herself gazing in his
eyes&mdash;was it with the intention of blinding those
eyes and preventing them from divining the truth?
or was it in mere horror of herself as the instrument
of a lie, of him, him whom she would fain have
thought perfect, as falsehood incarnate? There was
a moment when Hester knew nothing more, when,
though she was on fire and her thoughts like flame,
lighting up a wild world of dismay about her, she
yet felt as if turned into stone.</p>

<p>The note itself when she received it, in the quiet
freshness of the morning, all ordinary and calm, her
mother scarcely awake as yet, the little household
affairs just beginning, those daily processes of cleaning
and providing without which no existence can be&mdash;had
been agitation enough. It had come to her
like a sudden sharp stroke, cutting her loose from
everything, like the cutting of a rope which holds a
boat, or the stroke that severs a branch. In a
moment she was separated from all that soft established
order, from the life that had clasped her all
round as if it would hold her fast for ever. Her
eyes had scarcely run over those hurried lines before
she felt a wild sensation of freedom, the wind in her
face, the gurgle of the water, the sense of flight.
She put out her hands to screen herself, not to be<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_157" id="Page_157">[Pg 157]</a></span>
carried off by the mere breeze, the strong-blowing
gale of revolution. A thrill of strange delight, yet
of fright and alarm, ran through her veins&mdash;the
flood of her sensations overwhelmed her. Its suddenness,
its nearness, its certainty, brought an intoxication
of feeling. All this monotony to be over;
a new world of adventure, of novelty, of love, and
daring and movement, and all to begin to-night.
These thoughts mounted to her head in waves.
And as the minutes hurried along and the world
grew more and more awake, and Mrs. John came
down stairs to breakfast, the fire in Hester's veins
grew hotter and hotter. To-night, in the darkness&mdash;for
ever or no more at all. It seemed incredible that
she could contain it all, and keep her secret and make
no sign. All this time no question of it as of a matter
on which she must make up her mind, and in which
there was choice, had come into her thoughts. She
was not usually passive, but for the moment she received
these words as simple directions which there
could be no doubt of her carrying out. His passion
and certainty took possession of her: everything
seemed distinct and necessary&mdash;the meeting in the
dusk, the hurried journey, the flight through the darkness.
For great excitement stops as much as it accelerates
the action of the mind. Her thoughts flew out
upon the wind, into the unknown, but they did not
pause to discuss the first steps. Had he directed her
to do all this at once, in the morning instead of in the
dusk, she would have obeyed his instructions instinctively
like a child, without stopping to inquire why.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_158" id="Page_158">[Pg 158]</a></span></p>

<p>But this mood was changed by the simplest of
domestic arguments. Mrs. John, fresh and smiling
in her black gown and her white cap, came down to
breakfast. Not a suspicion of anything out of the
ordinary routine was in Mrs. John's mind. It was a
lovely morning; the sunshine pleased her as it did
the flowers who hold up their heads to it and open
out and feel themselves alive. Her chair was on the
sunny side of the table, as it always was. She liked
to sit in it and be warmed by it. She began to talk
of all the little household things as she took her
tea; of how the strawberries would soon be cheap
enough for jam. That was the one thing that remained
in Hester's mind years after. In a moment,
while her thoughts were full of a final and sudden
flight, that little speech about the jam and the
strawberries brought her to herself. She felt herself
to come back with a sudden harsh jarring and
stumbling to solid ground. "The strawberries!"
she said, looking at her mother with wild eyes of
dismay as if there had been something tragic in
them. "In about a fortnight, my dear, they will be
quite cheap enough," Mrs. John said, with a contented
nod of her head. In a fortnight! a fortnight!&mdash;a
century would not mean so much. A fortnight
hence what would the mother be thinking, where
would the daughter be? Then there came to Hester
another revelation as sudden, as all-potent as the
first&mdash;that it was Impossible&mdash;that she must be mad
or dreaming. What! fly, go away, disappear, whatever
might be the word? She suddenly laughed<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_159" id="Page_159">[Pg 159]</a></span>
out, her mother could not tell why, dropping a china
cup, over which Mrs. John made many lamentations.
It broke a set, it was old Worcester, worth a great
deal of money. It had been her grandmother's.
"Oh, my dear, I wish you would not be so careless!"
But of anything else that was broken, or of the
mystery of that sudden laugh which corresponded
with no expression of mirth on Hester's face, Mrs.
John knew nothing. Impossible! Why there was
not a word to be said, not a moment's hesitation. It
could not be&mdash;how could it be? Edward, a young
man full of engagements, caught by a hundred bonds
of duty, of work, of affection&mdash;why, if nothing else,
of business&mdash;to whom it was difficult to be absent
for a week, who had sometimes to run up and down
to town in twenty-four hours&mdash;that he should be able
to go away! He must mean something else by it,
she said to herself; the words must bear a second
signification. And she herself, who had no business,
or duty, or tie of any sort except one, but that one
enough to move heaven and earth, her mother&mdash;who
in a fortnight would be making the jam if the strawberries
were cheap enough. The thought moved her
to laughter again, a laugh out of a strangely solemn,
excited countenance. But this sudden revulsion of
feeling had given the whole matter a certain grotesque
mixture of the ludicrous: it demonstrated
the impossibility of any such overturn with such a
sarcastic touch. Hester said to herself that she
must have been nearly making some tragical
mistake, and compromising her character for good<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_160" id="Page_160">[Pg 160]</a></span>
sense for ever. Of course it was impossible. Whatever
he meant by the words he did not mean that.</p>

<p>After breakfast, when she was alone and had read
the note over again, and could find no interpretation
of it but the first one, and had begun to enter into
the agonies of a mental struggle, Hester relieved
the conflict by putting it down on paper&mdash;writing to
Edward, to herself, in the first instance, through him.
She asked him what he meant, what other sense
there was in his words which she had not grasped?
He go away! how could he, with Catherine trusting
in him, with Vernon's depending upon him, with his
work and his reputation, and so much at stake; and
she with her mother? Did not he see that it was
impossible? Impossible! He might say that she
should have pointed this out before, but she had
never realised it; it had been words to her, no more;
and it was words now, was it not? words that meant
something beyond her understanding&mdash;a test of her
understanding; but she had no understanding it
appeared. Hester thought that she would send this
letter to await him when he reached the Grange,
and then she would keep his appointment and find
him&mdash;ready to laugh at her, as she had laughed at
herself. She put it hurriedly into her desk when
Harry appeared, with a guilty sense that Harry, if
he saw it, would not only divine whom it was
addressed to, but even what it said. But Harry
was no warlock, and though he saw the hurried
movement and the withdrawal of the papers, never
asked himself what it was.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_161" id="Page_161">[Pg 161]</a></span></p>

<p>But after Harry was gone, she wrote no more.
She gave one glance at the pages full of anxious
pleading, of tender remonstrances, of love and perplexity;
then closed the lid upon them, as if it
had been the lid of a coffin, and locked it securely.
They were obsolete, and out of date, as if her grandmother
had written them. They had nothing to do
with the real question; they were as fictitious as if
they had been taken out of a novel. All that she
had said was foolishness, like the drivelling of an
idiot. Duty! she had asked triumphantly, how
could he disengage himself from that? how could
she leave her mother behind?&mdash;when, great heaven!
all that he wanted was to shake duty off, and get rid
of every tie. Harry's revelation brought such a
contrast before her, that Hester could but stare at
the two pictures with dumb consternation. On one
side the bank in gloomy disarray, its ordinary course
of action stopped, the business "all wrong," poor
people besieging its doors for their money, the clerks
bewildered, and not knowing what to do; and poor
Harry faithful, but incapable, knowing no better
than they. On the other, Edward, in all a bridegroom's
excitement, with the woman he loved beside
him, travelling far away into the night, flushed with
pleasure, with novelty, with the success of his actions
whatever they were, and with the world before him.
It seemed to Hester that she saw the two scenes,
although she herself would have to be an actor in
one of them if it ever came to pass. She saw them
to the most insignificant details. The bank (Vernon's&mdash;that<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_162" id="Page_162">[Pg 162]</a></span>
sheet-anchor of the race, for which she herself
felt a hot partisanship, a desire to build it up with the
prop of her own life if that would do it), full of angry
and miserable people cursing its very name&mdash;while
the fugitives, with every comfort about them, were
fast getting out of sight and hearing of everything
that could recall what they had left. Deserter!
traitor! Were these the words that would be used?
and was he going to fly from the ruin he had made?
That last most terrible question of all began to force
itself to her lips, and all the air seemed to grow
alive and be filled with darting tongues and voices
and hissings of reply. And then it was that Hester
felt as if her very hair began to writhe and twist in
living horror about her shoulders, and that her eyes,
wide with fright and terror, were becoming like
Medusa's, things that might turn all that was living
to stone.</p>

<p>But to think through a long summer day is a
terrible ordeal, and many changes and turns of the
mind are inevitable. It was a pitiless long day,
imagine it! in June, when not a moment is spared
you. It was very bright, all nature enjoying the
light. The sun seemed to stand still in the sky, as
on that day when he stopped to watch the slaughter
in Ajalon; and even when he disappeared at last,
the twilight lasted and lingered as if it would never
be done.</p>

<p>Hester had put away her long letter of appeal, but
she wrote a brief, almost stern note, which she sent
to the Grange in the early evening. It ran thus:&mdash;</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_163" id="Page_163">[Pg 163]</a></span></p>

<blockquote>
<p>"Harry has told us that all is going wrong at the
bank, that you are wanted urgently there, that only
you can set things right. You cannot have known
this when you wrote to me. I take it for granted
this changes everything, but I will come to-night to
the place you name."</p>
</blockquote>

<p>She sent her note in the afternoon, and then
waited, like a condemned criminal, faintly hoping
still for a reprieve; for perhaps to know this would
stop him still; perhaps he had not known it. She
went out just after sunset, escaping not without
difficulty from her mother's care.</p>

<p>"It is too late for you to go out by yourself," Mrs.
John said. "I do not like it. You girls are so
independent. I never went beyond the garden by
myself at your age."</p>

<p>"I am only going to the Common," Hester said, with
a quiver in her voice. She kissed her mother very
tenderly. She was not in the habit of bestowing caresses,
so that this a little startled Mrs. John; but she
returned it warmly, and bade her child take a shawl.</p>

<p>Did Hester think she might yet be carried away
by the flood of the other's will, against her own, that
she took her leave so solemnly? It was rather a
sort of imaginative reflection of what she might
have been doing if&mdash;&mdash; She had gone but a little
way when she met Captain Morgan.</p>

<p>"Why did not you tell me you were going out?"
he said. "I have tired myself now; I can't go with
you. I have been inquiring about the midnight<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_164" id="Page_164">[Pg 164]</a></span>
train for Emma, who did not get off this morning
after all."</p>

<p>"Is she going by the midnight train?" Hester
asked, with a sense of inconvenience in it that she
could hardly explain.</p>

<p>"Yes, if it is possible to get her off," said the
captain; "but, my dear, it is too late for you to
walk alone."</p>

<p>"No, oh no. It is only for this once," Hester
cried, with involuntary passion unawares.</p>

<p>"My dear child!" said the old man. He was disturbed
by her looks. "I will go in and get an
overcoat, and join you directly, Hester; for though
I am tired I would rather be over-tired than that
you should walk alone."</p>

<p>The only way that Hester could defend herself
was to hurry away out of sight before he came out
again. She had a dark dress, a veil over her face.
Her springy step indeed was not easy to be mistaken,
nor the outline of her alert and vigorous
figure, which was so much unlike loitering. She
got away into the fields by a lonely path, where she
could be safe she thought till the time of her
appointment came. What was to happen at that
appointment she could not tell. Excitement was
so high in her veins that she had no time to ask
herself what she would answer him if he kept to his
intention, or what she should do. Was it on the
cards still that she might follow him to the end of
the world?</p>

<p>Edward had arrived late, only in time for dinner.<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_165" id="Page_165">[Pg 165]</a></span>
He got Hester's note and read it with an impatient
exclamation.</p>

<p>"The little fool," he said to himself, "as if that
was not the very&mdash;&mdash;" and tore it in a thousand
pieces. He dressed for dinner very carefully, as
was his wont, and was very pleasant at table, telling
Catherine various incidents of his journey. "You
must make the most of me while you have me," he
said, "for I have a pile of letters in my room that
would make any one ill to look at. I must get
through them to-night&mdash;there may be something
important. It is a pity Harry doesn't take more
of a share."</p>

<p>"I think for my part it is one of the best things
about him," said Catherine, "that he always acknowledges
your superiority. He knows he will never
set the Thames on fire."</p>

<p>"And why should he?" said Edward: "a man may
be a very good man of business without that. I
wish he would go into things more; then he would
always be ready in case of an emergency."</p>

<p>"What emergency?" said Catherine, almost
sharply. "You are too far-seeing, I think."</p>

<p>"Oh, I might die, you know," said Edward, with
an abrupt laugh.</p>

<p>"Anything might happen," she said; "but there
are many more likely contingencies to be provided
for. What is that?" she added quickly.</p>

<p>The butler had brought in and presented to
Edward upon a large silver salver which called
attention to it, a small, white, square object.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_166" id="Page_166">[Pg 166]</a></span></p>

<p>"Return tickets, ma'am," said the butler solemnly,
"as dropped out of Mr. Edward's overcoat."</p>

<p>"Return tickets! you are not going back again,
Edward?"</p>

<p>"I am always running up and down, Aunt Catherine.
I constantly take return tickets," he said
quietly, pocketing the tickets and giving the butler
a look which he did not soon forget. For there
were two of them, which Marshall could not understand.
As for Catherine, this gave her a little pang,
she could not tell why. But Edward had never
found so much to tell her before. He kept her
amused during the whole time of dinner. Afterwards
he took her up stairs into the drawing-room
and put her into her favourite chair, and did everything
that a tender son could have done for her
comfort. It was growing dusk by this time, and he
had not been able to keep himself from giving a
glance now and then at the sky.</p>

<p>"Do you think we are going to have a storm,
Edward?" Catherine asked.</p>

<p>"I think it looks a little like it. You had better
have your window shut," he said.</p>

<p>He had never been more kind. He kissed her
hand and her cheek when he went away, saying it
was possible if his letters were very tough that he
might not come up stairs again before she went
to bed.</p>

<p>"Your hand is hot," she said, "my dear boy. I
am afraid you are a little feverish."</p>

<p>"It has been very warm in town, and I am<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_167" id="Page_167">[Pg 167]</a></span>
always best, you know, in country air," was what
he said.</p>

<p>She sat very quietly for some time after he had
left her, then seeing no appearance of any storm,
rose and opened her window again. He was almost
too careful of her. As she did so she heard a faint
sound below as of some one softly closing the door.
Was it Edward going out notwithstanding his letters?
She put herself very close to the window to watch.
He had a small bag in his hand, and stood for a
moment at the gate looking up and down; then he
made a quick step beyond it as if to meet some one.
Catherine watched, straining her eyes through the
gloom. She was not angry. It brought all her
fears, her watchfulness, back in a moment. But if
it was true that he loved Hester, of course he must
wish to see her&mdash;if she was so unmaidenly, so unwomanly
as to consent to come out like this to
meet him. And was it at her own very door that
the tryst was? This roused Catherine. She heard
a murmur of voices on the other side of the great
holly. The summer night was so soft, every sound
was carried by the air. Here was her opportunity
to discover who it was. She did not pause to think,
but taking up her shawl in her hand threw it over
her head as she stole down stairs. It was black and
made her almost invisible, her dress being black too.
She came out at a side door, narrowly escaping the
curiosity of Marshall. The bright day had fallen into
a very dim evening. There was neither moon nor
stars. She stole out by the side door, avoiding the<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_168" id="Page_168">[Pg 168]</a></span>
path. Her footsteps made no sound on the grass.
She crossed the gravel on tiptoe, and wound her way
among the shrubberies till she stood exactly under
the holly-tree. The wall there was about up to a
man's shoulders; and it was surmounted by a railing.
She stood securely under the shadow of it, with her
heart beating very loudly, and listened to their
voices. Ah, there could be no doubt about it. She
said to herself that she never had any doubt. It
was the voice of <i>that girl</i> which answered
Edward's low, passionate appeals. There are some
cases in which honour demands a sacrifice scarcely
possible. She had it in her power to satisfy herself
at once as to the terms upon which they were, and
what they expected and wished for. She had no
intention of eavesdropping. It was one of the sins
to which Catherine was least disposed; but to turn
back without satisfying herself seemed impossible
now.</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_169" id="Page_169">[Pg 169]</a></span></p>




<h2><a name="CHAPTER_IX" id="CHAPTER_IX">CHAPTER XXXIX.</a></h2>

<h3>UNDER THE HOLLY.</h3>


<p>It seemed to Hester that she had been for hours
out of doors, and that the lingering June evening
would never end. Now and then she met in the
fields a party of Redborough people taking a walk&mdash;a
mother with a little group of children, a father
with a taller girl or boy, a pair of lovers. They all
looked after her, wondering a little that a young
lady, and one who belonged to the Vernons (for
everybody knew her), should be out so late alone.
"But why should she not have a young man too?"
the lovers thought, and felt a great interest in the
question whether they should meet her again, and
who <i>he</i> might be. But still it could not be said to be
dark&mdash;the wild roses were still quite pink upon the
hedges. The moments lingered along, the clocks
kept chiming by intervals. Hester, by dint of long
thinking, felt that she had become incapable of all
thought. She no longer remembered what she had
intended to say to him, nor could divine what he
would say. If it were but over, if the moment<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_170" id="Page_170">[Pg 170]</a></span>
would but come! She felt capable of nothing but
that wish; her mind seemed to be running by her
like a stream, with a strange velocity which came to
nothing. Then she woke up suddenly to feel that
the time had come. The summer fields all golden
with buttercups had stolen away into the grey, the
hedgerows only betrayed themselves by a vague
darkness. She could not see the faces, or anything
but ghostlike outlines of those she met. The time
had come when one looks like another, and identity
is taken away.</p>

<p>There was nobody upon the Grange road. She
went along as swift as a shadow, like a ghost, her
veil over her face. The holly-tree stood black like a
pillar of cloud at the gate, and some one stood close
by waiting&mdash;not a creature to see them far or near.
They clasped hands and stood together enveloped by
the greyness, the confused atmosphere of evening,
which seemed to hide them even from each other.</p>

<p>"Thank Heaven I have you at last. I thought
you were never coming," Edward said.</p>

<p>"It was not dark enough till now. Oh, Edward!
that we should meet like thieves, like&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Lovers, darling. The most innocent of lovers
come together so&mdash;especially when the fates are
against them; they are against us no more, Hester.
Take my arm, and let us go. We have nothing
to wait for. I think I have thought of everything.
Good-bye to the old life&mdash;the dreary, the vain. My
only love! Come, there is nothing to detain us&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>It was at this moment that the secret listener&mdash;who<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_171" id="Page_171">[Pg 171]</a></span>
came without any intention of listening, who
wanted only to see who it was and what it meant&mdash;losing
her shoe in the heavy ground of the shrubbery,
stole into that corner behind the wall.</p>

<p>"Oh, Edward, wait&mdash;there is everything to detain
us. Did you not get my note? They say things
are going wrong with Vernons&mdash;that the bank&mdash;&mdash;I
can't tell what it is, but you will understand. Harry
said nothing could be done till you came."</p>

<p>"Harry is a fool!" he said, bitterly. "Why didn't
he take his share of the work and understand matters?
Is it my fault if it was all thrown into my hands?
Hester, you are my own love, but you are a fool too!
Don't you see? Can't you understand that this is
the very reason? But why should I try to explain
at such a moment&mdash;or you ask me? Come, my
darling! Safety and happiness and everything we
can wish lie beyond yon railway. Let us get away."</p>

<p>"I am not going, Edward. Oh, how could you
think it! I never meant to go."</p>

<p>"Not going!" he laughed, and took her hands
into his, with an impatience, however, which made
him restless, which might have made him violent,
"that is a pretty thing to tell me just when you
have met me for the purpose. I know you want to
be persuaded. But come, come; I will persuade
you as much as you can desire when I get you safe
into the train."</p>

<p>"It is not persuasion I want. If it was right I
would go if all the world were against it. Edward,
do you know what it looks like? It looks like<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_172" id="Page_172">[Pg 172]</a></span>
treachery&mdash;like deserting your post&mdash;like leading
them into danger, then leaving them in their
ignorance to stumble out as they can."</p>

<p>"Well?" he said. "Is that all? If we get off
with that we shall do very well, Hester. I shouldn't
wonder if they said harder things still."</p>

<p>"If the bank should&mdash;come to harm. I am a
Vernon too. I can't bear it should come to harm.
If anything was to happen&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"If it will abridge this discussion&mdash;which surely
is ill-timed, Hester, to say the least&mdash;I may admit at
once that it is likely to come to harm. I don't know
how things are to be tided over this time. The
bank's on its last legs. We needn't make any
mystery on the subject. What's that?"</p>

<p>It was a sound&mdash;of intolerable woe, indignation,
and wrath from behind the wall. Catherine was
listening, with her hands clasped hard to keep herself
up. It was not a cry which would have betrayed
her, but an involuntary rustle or movement, a gasp,
indistinguishable from so many other utterances of
the night.</p>

<p>"I suppose it was nothing," he added. "Hester,
come; we can't stand here like two&mdash;thieves, as you
say, to be found out by anybody. There's that
villain Marshall, Catherine's spy, always on the outlook.
He tells his mistress everything. However,
that does not matter much now. By to-morrow,
dear, neither you nor I need mind what they say.
There will be plenty said&mdash;we must make up our minds
to that. I suppose you gave your mother a hint&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_173" id="Page_173">[Pg 173]</a></span></p>

<p>"My mother, a hint? Edward! how could I dare
to say to her&mdash;What would she think? but oh,
that comes so long a way after! The first thing is,
you cannot go; Edward, you must not go, a man
cannot be a traitor. It is just the one thing&mdash;If
all was plain sailing, well; but when things are going
badly&mdash; Oh no, no, I will not hear you say so. You
cannot desert your post."</p>

<p>He took hold of her arm in the intensity of his
vexation and rage.</p>

<p>"You are a fool," he said, hoarsely. "Hester! I
love you all the same, but you are a fool! Didn't I
tell you at first I was risking everything. Heavens,
can't you understand! Desert my post! I have no
post. It will be better for them that I should be out
of the way. I&mdash;must go&mdash;confound it! Hester, for
God's sake, haven't you made up your mind! Do
you know that every moment I stand here I am in
danger? Come! come! I will tell you everything
on the way."</p>

<p>She gave a cry as if his pressure, the almost force
he used to draw her with him, had hurt her. She
drew her hand out of his.</p>

<p>"I never thought it possible," she said, "I never
thought it possible! Oh, Edward! danger, what is
danger? There's no danger but going wrong. Stop:
my love&mdash;yes, you are my love&mdash;there has never been
any one between us. If you have been foolish in
your speculations, or whatever they are, or even
wrong&mdash;stay, Edward, stay, and put it right. Oh, stay,
and put it right! There can be no danger if you<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_174" id="Page_174">[Pg 174]</a></span>
will stand up and say 'I did it, I will put it right;'
and I&mdash;if you care for me&mdash;I will stand by you
through everything. I will be your clerk; I will work
for you night and day. There is no trouble I will
not save you, Edward. Oh, Edward, for God's sake,
think of Catherine, how good she has been to you;
and it will break her heart. Think of Vernon's,
which we have all been so proud of, which gives us
our place in the country. Edward, think of&mdash;Won't
you listen to me? You will be a man dishonoured,
they will call you&mdash;they will think you&mdash;Edward!"</p>

<p>"All this comes finely from you," he cried,
"beautifully from you! You have a right to set up
on the heights of honour, and as the champion of
Vernon's. You, John Vernon's daughter, the man
that ruined the bank."</p>

<p>"The man that&mdash;&mdash; Oh, my God! Edward, what
are you saying&mdash;my father! the man&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>He laughed out&mdash;laughed aloud, forgetting
precautions.</p>

<p>"Do you mean to say you did not know&mdash;the man
that was such a fool, that left it a ruin on Catherine's
hands? You did not know why she hated you?
You are the only one in the place that does not. I
have taken the disease from him, through you; it
must run in the blood. Come, come, you drive me
into heroics too. There is enough of this; but
you've no honour to stand upon, Hester; we are in
the same box. Come along with me now."</p>

<p>Hester felt that she had been stricken to the
heart. She drew away from him till she got to the<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_175" id="Page_175">[Pg 175]</a></span>
rough support of the wall, and leant upon it, hiding
her face, pressing her soft cheek against the roughness
of the brick. He drew her other arm into his,
trying to lead her away; but she resisted, putting
her hand on him, and pushing him from her with all
her force.</p>

<p>"There is not another word to be said," she cried.
"Go away, if you will go; go away. I will never
go with you! All that is over now."</p>

<p>"This is folly," he said. "Why did you come here
if you had not made up your mind? And if I tell
you a piece of old news, a thing that everybody
knows, is that to make a breach between us?
Hester! where are you going? the other way&mdash;the
other way!"</p>

<p>She was feeling her way along the wall to the
gate. It was very dark, and they were like shadows,
small, vague, under the black canopy of the tree.
She kept him away with her outstretched arm which
he felt rather than saw.</p>

<p>"I never knew it&mdash;I never knew it," she said, with
sobs. "I am going to Catherine to ask her pardon
on my knees."</p>

<p>"Hester, for God's sake don't be a fool&mdash; To
Catherine! You mean to send out after me, to stop
me, to betray me! but by&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>The oath never got uttered, whatever it was.
Another figure, tall and shadowy, appeared behind
them in the opening of the gate. Edward gave one
startled look, then flung from him the hand of Hester
which he had grasped unawares, and hurried away<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_176" id="Page_176">[Pg 176]</a></span>
towards the town, with the speed of a ghost. He
flung it with such force that the girl's relaxed and
drooping figured followed, and she fell before the
third person, the new comer, and lay across the
gateway of the Grange, half stunned, not knowing
at whose feet she lay.</p>

<hr class="tb" />

<p>Edward hastened onward like a ghost speeding
along the dark road. He was miserable, but the
greatest misery of all was to think that even now at
the last moment he might be brought back&mdash;he
might be stopped upon the edge of this freedom for
which he longed. He wanted Hester, he wanted happiness,
and he had lost them&mdash;but there was still freedom.
Had there been only the risks of the crisis, the
meeting of alarmed and anxious creditors, the chance
even of criminal prosecution, he might have faced it;
but to return again to that old routine, to take up
his former life, was impossible. He flew along like
the wind. There was still an hour or more before
the train would start. Would the women gather
themselves together, he wondered, soon enough to
send after him, to prevent his journey? As much
to avoid that risk as to occupy the time, which he
did not know what else to do with, he resolved to
walk to the junction, which was at a distance of two
or three miles. So strange is the human constitution,
that even at this tragic and sombre moment he
almost enjoyed the dark night walk, though it was
that of a fugitive; the present is always so near us,
so palpable, so much more apparent than either the<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_177" id="Page_177">[Pg 177]</a></span>
future or the past. He arrived at the junction just
in time, and jumped into the first carriage he could
find in his hurry. He had no luggage, having left
everything in town&mdash;nothing but the small bag in his
hand, in which there were various things which he had
meant to show to Hester, to amuse her, distract her
thoughts on the night journey, and keep her from
too many questions. Among these things was a
special licence, which he had procured that morning
in town. He jumped into the carriage without
perceiving there was any one in it; and it annoyed
him to see, when he settled in the furthest corner, that
there was a woman in the other. But the light was
low, and it could not be helped. Thus shut up in
close and silent company, two strangers, each
wrapped in a world of their own, they went swinging
through the night, the lights of the stations on the
road gleaming past, while with a roar and rush they
ran through covering sheds and by empty platforms.
After a while Edward's attention was caught, in
spite of himself, by a little measured sob and sigh,
which came at intervals from the other corner. The
lady was very quiet, but very methodical. She put
back her veil; she took out her handkerchief; she
proceeded to dry her eyes in a serious matter-of-fact
way. Edward could not help watching these little
proceedings. A few minutes after, with a start, he
perceived who his companion was. Emma, going
home at last, just as she came, no one having spoken,
nor any event occurred to change the current of her
life. Her little sniff, her carefully-wiped-off tears<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_178" id="Page_178">[Pg 178]</a></span>
were for her failure, and for the dulness of Kilburn,
which she was about to return to. A sudden idea
struck Edward's mind. He changed his seat, came
nearer to her, and at last spoke.</p>

<p>"I am afraid, Miss Ashton, you don't like travelling
by night," he said.</p>

<p>She gave a little start and cry. "Oh, is it you, Mr.
Edward? I thought when you came in, it must be
somebody I knew. Oh, I am afraid you must have
seen me crying. I am very sorry to go away; everybody
in Redborough has been so kind to me, and
there is always so much going on."</p>

<p>"But in London&mdash;&mdash;" Edward began.</p>

<p>"Oh, that is what everybody says. There is
always so much going on in London. That just
shows how little they know. Perhaps among the
fashionable sets. I don't know anything about that;
but not in Kilburn. It's partly like a little village,
and partly like a great huge town. You're not supposed
to know the people next door; and then they
are all just nobody. The men come home to their
dinner or their tea, and then there is an end of them.
When you are in the best set in a place it makes
such a difference. Roland is very kind, and I have
nothing to complain of, but I can't bear going back.
That's what I was crying for: not so much for having
to leave, but for having to go back."</p>

<p>"You are tired of your life too, I suppose?"</p>

<p>"Oh, so I am! but it can't be helped. I must
just go back to it, whether I like it or not."</p>

<p>"Would you be glad of an alternative?" asked<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_179" id="Page_179">[Pg 179]</a></span>
Edward. He spoke with a sort of wanton recklessness,
not caring what became of him.</p>

<p>"Oh!" said Emma, waiting upon providence,
"that is a different thing; perhaps it would be
better not: I can't tell. Yes, I think I should, if
you ask me. Anything new would be a blessing;
but where am I to look for anything new? You see,
Roland has his own engagements; you never can
interfere with a brother."</p>

<p>It took away her breath when Edward rose from
the opposite side where he was and came and sat
beside her. "I am going away too," he said; "I
want change too. I can't bear the quiet any longer.
I want to travel. Will you come with me? We
could be married to-morrow morning and start
immediately after&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Mr. Edward! good gracious!" cried Emma. It
took away her breath. This was coming to the point
indeed. "Was this what you were thinking of when
you asked me to dance the Thursday before last?
I never thought of such a thing. I thought it was
Hester. Goodness me, what would they all say?
Did you know I was coming to-night? Were you
only pretending about Hester? Were you struck
with me from the beginning, or only just at the last?
I am sure I don't know what to say."</p>

<p>"Come with me, that is the best thing to do,"
Edward said.</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_180" id="Page_180">[Pg 180]</a></span></p>




<h2><a name="CHAPTER_X" id="CHAPTER_X">CHAPTER XL.</a></h2>

<h3>THE HOUR OF NEED.</h3>


<p>Catherine stood upon the threshold of her own
gate: her house still and vacant behind, the lamps
just carried into the vacant place up stairs, the
windows beginning to show lights. She stood, herself
a shadow, for the moment regardless of the
shadow at her feet, looking out into the dim world
after the other shadow which went along swift and
silent into the darkness. "Edward!" she cried; but
he did not hear. He had disappeared before she
turned her eyes to the other, who, by this time, had
raised herself to her knees, and remained there looking
up, her face a paleness in the dim air, nothing
more. Catherine Vernon looked at her in silence.
She had heard all that had been said. She had
heard the girl plead for herself, and it had not
touched her heart. She had heard Hester beaten
down to the ground by the reproach of her father's
shame, and a certain pity had moved her. But a
heart, like any other vessel, can contain only what it<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_181" id="Page_181">[Pg 181]</a></span>
can contain. What time had she to think of Hester?
what room? Edward had been her son, her creed;
whoso proved that he was not worthy of faith even
in Catherine's interest was her enemy; everything
else came in a second place. He had stabbed and
stabbed her, till the blood of those wounds seemed
to fill up every crevice in her being. How could she
think of a second? She looked after him with
a cry of sorrow and anger and love that would
not die. "Edward!" No doubt he could explain
everything&mdash;he could tell her how it was, what
had happened, what was the meaning of it all. Only
when he was gone, and it was certain that he meant
to explain nothing, did she turn to the other. They
looked at each other, though neither could see
anything but that paleness of a face. Then Catherine
said&mdash;</p>

<p>"If you are not hurt, get up and come in. I have
to ask you&mdash;there are things to explain&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"I am not hurt: he did not throw me down," said
Hester, "it was an accident."</p>

<p>Catherine made an impatient gesture. She did
not even help the girl to get up; the dislike of so
many years, raised to the tragic point by this association
with the most terrible moment of her life,
was not likely to yield in a moment, to give way to
any sense of justice or pity. She motioned to her
to follow, and led the way quickly into the house.
The great door was ajar, the stairs and passages still
dark. They went up, one shadow following another,
without a word. In the drawing-room Marshall had<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_182" id="Page_182">[Pg 182]</a></span>
just placed the two shaded lamps, and was closing
the windows. His mistress called to him to leave
them as they were, and sat without speaking until,
after various flittings about the room, he went away.
Then she hastily raised the shade from the lamp
upon her own table, throwing the light upon her
own face and the other. They were both very pale,
with eyes that shone with excitement and passion.
The likeness between them came out in the strangest
way as they stood thus, intent upon each other.
They were like mother and daughter standing
opposed in civil war. Then Catherine sat down and
pointed Hester to another chair.</p>

<p>"We are not friends," she said, "and I don't think
I can ever forgive you; but you are young, and
perhaps you are strained beyond your strength. I
would not be cruel. Will you let me give you
something to restore you, or will you not, before
you speak? for speak you must, and tell me what
this means."</p>

<p>"I want nothing," said Hester. "If I should be
killed, what would it matter? I recognise now that
I have no right to your kindness&mdash;if that was
true&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"It was true."</p>

<p>"Then I ask your pardon," said the girl, folding
her hands. "I would do it on my knees, but you
would think that was&mdash;for effect. I should think
so myself in your place. You do right to despise
us: only this&mdash;oh, God help us, God help us&mdash;I
never knew&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_183" id="Page_183">[Pg 183]</a></span></p>

<p>"Girl," cried Catherine roughly, "the man you
love (I suppose) has just fled away, so far as I can
see, dishonoured and disgraced, and leaving you for
ever! And yet you can stop to think about effect.
I do not think you can have any heart."</p>

<p>Hester made no reply. She had reached that
point which is beyond the heights of sensation. She
had felt everything that heart could feel. There
were no more tears in her, nor anger nor passion of
any kind. She stood speechless, let any one say
what they would to her. It might all be true.</p>

<p>"I do not think you can have any heart," cried
her passionate opponent. "If it had been me at
your age, and I had loved him, when he threw me
from him so, I should have died."</p>

<p>There came a ghost of an awakening on Hester's
face, a sort of pitiful smile of acquiescence. Perhaps
it might be so. Another, more finely tempered,
more impassioned, more high and noble than she,
might have done that: but for her, poor soul, she
had not died. She could not help it.</p>

<p>Catherine sat in her seat as in a throne, with a
white face and gleaming eyes, and poured forth her
accusations.</p>

<p>"I am glad of it," she said, "for my part! for
now you will be queen's evidence, which it is fit and
right your father's daughter should be. Do not
stand there as if I had put you on your trial.
What is it to me if you have any heart or not? I
want information from you. Sit down there and
husband your strength. How long has this been<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_184" id="Page_184">[Pg 184]</a></span>
going on? It was not the first time he had talked
to you of flying, oh no. Tell me honestly: that will
be making some amends. How long has this been
going on?"</p>

<p>Hester looked at her with great liquid eyes,
dewy in their youthfulness and life, though worn
with fatigue and pain. She asked in a low, wondering
voice, "Did you hear all we said?"</p>

<p>"I heard&mdash;all, or almost all. Oh, you look at me
so to accuse me, a listener that has heard no good
of herself! I am not sorry I did it. It was without
intention, but it was well. I can answer for myself.
Do you answer for yourself. How long has it been
going on?"</p>

<p>Hester stood still, clasping and unclasping her
hands. She had nobody to appeal to, to stand by
her: this was a kind of effort to get strength from
herself. And her spirit began to come back. The
shock had been terrible, but she had not been
killed. "What can I say to you beyond what I
have said," she cried, "if you heard what we said?
There was no more. His life has been intolerable
to him for a long time; the monotony, the bondage
of it, has been more than he could bear. He has
wanted change and freedom&mdash;"</p>

<p>Hester thought she was making excuses for Edward.
She said all this quickly, meaning to show that these
were innocent causes for his flight, motives which
brought no guilt with them. She was brought to a
sudden pause. Catherine, who had been gazing at
her when she began with harsh, intent earnestness,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_185" id="Page_185">[Pg 185]</a></span>
suddenly threw up her hands with a low cry of
anguish. She sank back into her chair and covered
her face. The girl stood silenced, overawed, her lips
apart, her eyes wide staring. The elder woman had
shown no pity for her anguish. Hester, on her side,
had no understanding of this. She did not know
that this was the one delusion of Catherine's soul.
Miss Vernon had believed in no one else. She had
laughed and seen through every pretence&mdash;except
Edward. Edward had been the sole faith of her later
life. He had loved her, she believed; and she had
been able to give him a life worthy of him. Heaven
and earth! She had heard him raving, as she said
to herself, outside. The boy had gone wrong, as, alas,
so many have gone: out of a wicked, foolish love,
out of a desire to be rich, perhaps. But this was
different. A momentary temptation, even a quick
recurring error, that can be understood. But that
his life should have been intolerable, a monotony,
a bondage, that change had been what he longed for&mdash;change
from her house, her presence, her confidence!
She gave vent to a cry like that of a wild animal, full
of horror and misery and pain. The girl did not mean
to hurt her. There was sincerity in every tone of
her voice. She thought she was making his sins
venial and defending him. Oh, it was true, true!
Through Catherine's mind at that moment there ran
the whole story of her later days, how she had used
herself to the pretences of all about her, how every
one around had taken from her, and snarled at her,
eaten of her bread, and drunk of her cup, and hated<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_186" id="Page_186">[Pg 186]</a></span>
her&mdash;except Edward. He alone had been her prop,
her religion of the affections. The others had sneered
at her weakness for him, and she had held her head
high. She had prided herself on expecting no gratitude,
on being prepared, with a laugh, to receive evil
for good&mdash;except from him. Even now that she
should be forced to acknowledge him ungrateful, that
even would have been nothing, that would have done
her no hurt. But to hear that his past life had been
a burden, a bondage, a monotony, that freedom was
what he longed for&mdash;freedom from her! The whole
fabric of her life crushed together and rocked to its
foundations. She cried out to Heaven and earth that
she could not bear it&mdash;she could not bear it! Other
miseries might be possible, but this she could not
endure.</p>

<p>Hester stood motionless, arrested in what she had
to say. She did not understand the sudden effect of
her words; they seemed to her very common words,
nothing particular in them: certainly no harm. She
herself had experienced the monotony of life, the
narrowness and bondage. But as she stood silenced,
gazing, there came over her by degrees a faint comprehension;
and along with this a sudden consciousness
how strange it was that they should be both
heartbroken on one subject and yet stand aloof from
each other like enemies. It was not possible to mistake
that cry&mdash;that sudden gesture, the hiding of
Catherine's face. Whatever was the cause of it, it
was anguish. And was there not cause enough?
For a moment or two, Hester's pride kept her back&mdash;she<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_187" id="Page_187">[Pg 187]</a></span>
had been already repulsed. But her heart was
rent by trouble of her own. She made a step or two
forward, and then dropped upon her knees, and
touched Catherine's arm softly with a deprecating,
half-caressing touch.</p>

<p>"Oh, Catherine Vernon!" she cried, "we are both
in great trouble. We have not been fond of each
other; but I am sorry, sorry, for you&mdash;sorry to the
bottom of my heart."</p>

<p>Catherine made no reply. The shock was too
great, too terrible and overwhelming. She could not
answer nor show that she heard even, although she
did hear in the extraordinary tension of her faculties.
But Hester continued to kneel beside her. Youth
is more simple than age even when it is most self-willed.
The girl could not look on and refuse to be
touched, and she herself wanted fellowship, human
help or even human opposition, something different
from the loneliness in which she was left. She
touched Catherine's arm with her hand softly two or
three times, then after a while in utter downfall and
weakness drooped her forehead upon it, clasping it
with both her hands, and sobbed there as upon her
mother's breast. The room was perfectly still, stretching
round them, large and dim: in this one corner
the little steadfast light upon the group, the mother
(you would have said) hiding her face from the light,
hiding her anguish from both earth and Heaven,
the daughter with that clinging which is the best
support, giving to their mutual misery the pathetic
broken utterance of tears.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_188" id="Page_188">[Pg 188]</a></span></p>

<p>Catherine was the first to rouse herself. The spasm
was like death, but it came to an end. She tried to
rise with a little wondering impatience at the obstacle.
It was with the strangest sensation that she turned
her eyes upon the hidden head lying so near her
own, and felt, with an extraordinary thrill, the arms
clasped round her arm, as if they never would detach
themselves. What new thing was this? Hester had
lost all her spirit and power. She had got within the
sphere of a stronger than she. She was desolate, and
she clung to the only arm that could sustain her.
Catherine's first impulse was to snatch her arm away.
What was this creature to her&mdash;this girl who one
way or other had to do with everything that had
happened to her, and was the cause of the last
blow? She could have flung her away from her
as Edward had done. But the second glance moved
her more and more strangely. The helplessness had
an appeal in it, which would not be resisted. It even
did her the good office of withdrawing her thoughts
for a moment from the emergency which claimed
them all. She half rose, then fell back again and
was silent, not knowing what to do. What appeal
could be more strong than that of those arms so
tightly holding her own? She tried to speak
harshly, but could not. Then an impulse she could
not resist, led her to lay her other hand upon the
drooping head.</p>

<p>"Hester," she said, gravely, "I understand that you
are very unhappy. So am I. I thank you for being
sorry for me. I will try, in the future, to be sorry for<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_189" id="Page_189">[Pg 189]</a></span>
you. But just now, understand, there is a great deal
to do. We must stand between&mdash;him," her voice
faltered for a moment, then went on clear as before,
"between him and punishment. If he can be saved
he must be saved; if not, we must save what we can.
You have overcome me, I cannot put you from me.
Free me now, for I have a great deal to do."</p>

<p>She had felt, by the closer straining of the clasping
arms, that Hester heard every word. Now the girl
raised her face, pale, with a look of terror.</p>

<p>"What can you do? Are you able to do it?" she
said.</p>

<p>"Able!" said Catherine, raising herself upright
with a sort of smile. "I am able for everything that
has to be done. Child, get up and help me! Don't
cry there and break my heart."</p>

<p>Hester stumbled to her feet in a moment. She
could scarcely stand, but her heart sprang up like a
giant&mdash;</p>

<p>"I will do&mdash;whatever you tell me," she said.</p>

<p>Catherine rose too. She put away her emotion
from her as a workman clears away all encumbering
surroundings. She made the girl sit down, and went
out of the room and brought her some wine.</p>

<p>"Perhaps," she said, "we may help each other; at
all events we have a common interest, and we have
no time to give to lamentations to-night. The first
thing is&mdash;but your mother will be unhappy about
you. What shall I do? Shall I send her word that
you are here and staying with me all night? Your
mother is a happier woman than you or I. She will<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_190" id="Page_190">[Pg 190]</a></span>
accept the reason that is given her without questioning.
Probably she will be pleased. Be calm and
rest yourself. I will do all that is needful."</p>

<p>She went to her writing-table and began to write,
while Hester, shattered and broken, looked on.
Catherine showed no signs of disablement. The butler
came in in his stealthy way while she was writing,
and asked if he must "shut up." She said&mdash;"No,"
going on with her writing. "You will go, or send
some one, at once to the Heronry with this note. And
afterwards you can go to bed. I wish no one to sit
up. I expect news, for which I must wait myself.
Let all go to bed as usual. No, stop. Go to the
White House also and tell Mr. Harry&mdash;What do you
think, Hester? is it worth while to call Harry?"</p>

<p>She turned round with the clear eyes and self-controlled
aspect of use and wont. Even Marshall,
who had the skill of a well-trained domestic in spying
out internal commotion, was puzzled. She seemed to
be asking a question on a matter of business in which
the feelings were no ways involved. Hester was not
equal to the call upon her, but she made a great effort
to respond.</p>

<p>"He is very&mdash;anxious."</p>

<p>Catherine made a movement with her footstool
which partly drowned the last word.</p>

<p>"You can wait a little, Marshall. I will write a
note to Mr. Harry too."</p>

<p>The two letters were written at full speed, and
given with a hand as steady as usual into the man's
keeping. "Let them be taken at once," Catherine<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_191" id="Page_191">[Pg 191]</a></span>
said. Then she began to walk up and down the room
talking in her usual tones. "Don't mind me pacing
about&mdash;it is a habit I have. I can talk best so. It is
my way of taking exercise now." She went on until
Marshall was out of hearing, then turned upon Hester
with a changed tone. "He meant to take you away
by the midnight train," she said. "That was so? He
cannot leave Redborough till then. I am going to
meet him there, and endeavour to persuade him to
return. Quiet, child! This is not the moment for
feeling. I&mdash;feel nothing," she said, putting her hand
as nature bids with a hard pressure upon her heart.
"We have got to do now. Are you strong enough to
come with me, or must I go alone?"</p>

<p>Hester rose up too, quickly, with a start of new
energy. "I can do anything that you will let me
do," she said.</p>

<p>"Come, then." But after a moment Catherine
put her hands on the girl's shoulders, and drew her
into the light. "You are very young," she said, "not
twenty yet, are you? Poor little thing! I was full
grown before I was brought to this. But show what
metal is in you now. Come with me and bathe your
face and put yourself in order. We must have no
look of excitement or trouble to bring suspicion.
Everything is safe as yet. What? Do you know
anything more?"</p>

<p>"I know only&mdash;what I said," said Hester. "Harry
is very anxious. He came to ask if I knew where&mdash;<i>he</i>
was. I did not. He said all was wrong, that no
one could put things right but he, that&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_192" id="Page_192">[Pg 192]</a></span></p>

<p>"Yes, yes," Catherine said, with a little impatience;
she could not bear any repetitions. "I have told
Harry to come here at half-past twelve. If we find
<i>him</i>, if <i>he</i> comes back with us&mdash;here is your work,
Hester, to see Harry and dismiss him. If Edward is
with us, all will be well. If he comes, if he only
comes! Oh God! I will deny nothing. I will
oppose nothing, let but honour be saved and his
good name! And in that case you will see Harry
and send him away. But if he does not come&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"He will, he will!&mdash;for you."</p>

<p>Catherine shook her head; but a faint smile came
over her face, a kindling of hope. Surely, surely the
old love&mdash;the old long-enduring bond, would tell for
something. It could not be possible that he would
throw everything&mdash;love and duty, and honour, and
even well-being&mdash;all away&mdash;when there was still a
place of repentance held out to him. She took
Hester to her room, where she dressed herself carefully,
tying on her bonnet, and drawing out the bows
with an elaboration at which the girl looked on
wondering. Then they went down stairs where all
was now in half light, one lamp burning dimly in
the hall. As Catherine drew the heavy door behind
her it sent a muffled echo into the air. It was after
eleven o'clock. The world was wrapped in a soft
darkness more confusing than blacker night: there
was not a creature visible on the road. She had not
walked, save for her pleasure, in the sunshine just so
far as was agreeable, for years, and it was far to go.
To Hester this strange walk through the dark was at<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_193" id="Page_193">[Pg 193]</a></span>
once novel and terrible. She did not know what
interruptions they might meet. She kept close by
her companion, who went along with a free and rapid
step, as if she had shaken off half her weight of
years. Deep down in the recollection of many a
woman of whom the world knows no such history
will lurk the recollection of such a walk taken in
terror and sorrow, to call back some wanderer, to
stop some shame. The actors in such scenes never
speak of them, though they may be the noblest in
their lives. Catherine said something not uncheerful
from time to time, keeping up her own courage as
well as her companion's. Nobody noticed them as
they came within the lighted streets, which were
deserted at this late hour, except round the railway
station, where Catherine sped along without a pause.
The train had not arrived; there were a number of
people about upon the platform waiting for it, among
them a little group composed of Emma and her
trunks, with old Captain Morgan standing like a
pillar in the midst of the confused heap. "Wait
here and watch," Catherine said, putting Hester into
a quiet corner, where the girl stood trembling, gazing
at the shifting groups, hardly able to sustain her
fatigued and tottering limbs, but following with a
kind of fascination the movements of her companion,
who seemed to penetrate every knot, to scan every
countenance, not a creature there escaping her
inspection.</p>

<p>If he had been there, would all this page of history
have been changed, and wrong become right again?<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_194" id="Page_194">[Pg 194]</a></span>
These strange turns for good or evil, that seem to
hang upon the quiver of a balance, are too bewildering
for mortal senses. Catherine by that time had no
doubt. Had she but found him, quivering with love
and strength and passion as she was, she would have
saved him still. But he was not there. She made
no affectation of secresy. She called the guard to her,
and gave him a succinct reason for wishing to find
her nephew. "Some news have come for him since
he left the house. Find him for me," she said, with
a smile, and a half-crown ready. But by and by she
came back to the girl in the corner, reproving her
with an impatient touch on her shoulder. "Don't
look so scared," she said. "What is there to be
frightened for?" She took hold of Hester by the
arm. She was trembling from head to foot: for by
this time she knew that he was not there.</p>

<p>There was still the chance left that he might dart
in at the last moment, and it was for this reason that
she placed herself by the doorway, her face full in
the lamplight, with a smile upon it, her look of expectation
frank and cheerful. Then came the deafening
clang of the arrival, the confusion and bustle and
leave-takings, the little pause full of voices and
noises, and then the clang of the train getting under
way, the sweep and wind of its going, the emptiness
and blackness left behind: all so vulgar and ordinary,
yet all tragic sometimes as the most terrible of accessories.
She drew Hester aside almost violently,
and let the other spectators stream away. Among
the first old Captain Morgan stalked forth, tired but<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_195" id="Page_195">[Pg 195]</a></span>
contented, noticing nobody. Of all people in the
world he would least have recognised these two
standing in agitation inconceivable, subduing as they
could the heart-throbs that took away their breath.
When he had got well on his way the two women
came out into the light. They were holding by each
other, Hester clasping her companion's arm, and
guiding her as she had once guided her mother. A
sombre cloud had come over Catherine's face. She
had allowed herself to hope, and the second disappointment
was almost worse than the first revelation.
It was all her self-command could do to
prevent her from flinging off from her the girl whose
share in all this&mdash;what was it? perhaps the whole
was her doing, perhaps the suggestion of everything,
perhaps, God knows, craft enough to make this final
effort to recover the boy a failure. Who could say if
Hester had not known from the beginning that the
attempt would be fruitless? And the other, too,
Harry, whom she had called to her by an impulse
which seemed now to have been put into her head
by some one, and not to be her own. Harry, too.
He would be brought into the secret! Her humiliation
would be complete. The boy she had scoffed at,
the girl she had disliked, turned into her confidants,
and Edward, her own, her heir, her son, the successor
she had chosen!&mdash;Catherine's heart cried out within
her with a mother's passion. In the quiet of the
country road she could hold her peace no longer.
She drew her arm out of Hester's abruptly.</p>

<p>"No doubt," she said, "no doubt! he was to carry<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_196" id="Page_196">[Pg 196]</a></span>
you away, a fine lady like you, with posthorses in a
romantic way&mdash;not by the vulgar method of a train;
and you have deceived me, and lost me my last
chance. Edward! Edward! Oh where are you, my
boy, my boy?"</p>

<p>Here, had she but known it, poor Catherine's
comedy of human nature was complete. Edward,
upon whom she called with tragic passion as great as
that of a Constance, was just then approaching
Emma, in a fierce farce of self-compensation, determined
to make the adventure complete, to cut
every tie and tear every remnant of the past to
pieces. Her laugh of contempt at the poor farce-tragedy
would have been supreme had it been any
case but her own.</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_197" id="Page_197">[Pg 197]</a></span></p>




<h2><a name="CHAPTER_XI" id="CHAPTER_XI">CHAPTER XLI.</a></h2>

<h3>A NIGHT'S VIGIL.</h3>


<p>They had been sitting through all the night,
examining everything. Catherine was not a woman
to be the slave of passion, even when that was the
one delusion of her life. She got over it with a stern
and fierce struggle before they reached the gate of
the Grange, whither Hester followed her, trembling
and half stupefied, unable either to resist or to think
of any course of action for herself. Catherine paused
at the gate, and looked round her with a curious
quivering smile. "Here is where I saw him going
away," she said; "here is where I heard the last
words from him." She laughed; her heart was
throbbing with the wildest suffering. She dashed
her hands together with a violence of which she was
unaware. "Such words!" she cried. It was scarcely
one o'clock, but in summer there is little night, and
already the air had begun to whiten with some premonition
of day. She held up her face to the sky&mdash;an
old face, with so many lines in it, suddenly<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_198" id="Page_198">[Pg 198]</a></span>
smitten as with a death-blow. Her eyes, under the
curve of pain, which makes the eyelids quiver, looked
up to the pale skies with what is the last appeal of
humanity. For why?&mdash;for why?&mdash;an honest life, an
honourable career, a soul that had shrunk from no
labour or pain, a hand that never had been closed to
human distress&mdash;and repaid with misery at the end!
Is there no reason in it when God's creature lifts a
face of anguish to His throne, and asks why? She
paused on the threshold of her house, which was
desolate, and made that mute appeal. It was beyond
all words or crying, as it was beyond all reply. The
other, who was the companion of her misfortune,
stood beside her, looking, not at heaven, but at her.
Hester had got far beyond thinking of her own share
in it. Fatigue and excitement had brought sensation
almost to an end. She was not angry with Catherine,
who had thrown her off. Everything was blurred to
her in a sense of calamity common and universal, of
which Catherine seemed the sign and emblem. She
made no interruption in the silence. And it was
only when Catherine turned to go in that she was
recalled to a recollection of Hester by her side.</p>

<p>"I think&mdash;I had better go home&mdash;to my mother,"
the girl said, looking along the road with a dreamy
terror. She was afraid of the dark, the solitude, the
distance&mdash;and yet what was there left to her but to
go home, which she seemed to have quitted, to have
fled from, with the idea of never returning, years ago.
Catherine put out her hand and grasped her. She
was far the more vigorous of the two. She could<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_199" id="Page_199">[Pg 199]</a></span>
have carried the girl into the house, where she now
half led, half dragged her. They found Harry
already waiting for them in great bewilderment and
distress. He could not account for the entrance of
these two together, or for their apparent union&mdash;but
Catherine gave him no explanation. She made him
sit down and tell her at once everything he knew of
the state of affairs: and when this was made plain
to her, she flew out upon him with a wrath that
made Harry shrink.</p>

<p>"Why did you leave everything in one person's
hands? Is it not a partner's business to look after
his own interests? You have piled all upon one
man's shoulders. He has had everything to do. It
has been too much for his mind&mdash;it has turned his
head. If it had been yours, what would have
happened to you?"</p>

<p>"I have been saying all that to myself, Aunt
Catherine," Harry said, humbly; "but you know I
am not clever, and poor Ned&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>She stamped her foot on the floor. "Let me have
none of your commiserations," she cried. "There is
nothing poor about it at least."</p>

<p>She put Hester down at the table with pen and
ink to write for her. She had not said a word of
compassion to her; this had been the way she had
chosen to express her feeling, whatever it was.
When Harry had interposed, begging to be allowed
to do it, she had stopped him summarily; and had
gone on thus, collecting information, dictating to
Hester, examining papers with Harry, asking a<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_200" id="Page_200">[Pg 200]</a></span>
hundred questions, till morning was blue in the skies.
When she saw by that strange light stealing in, how
wan and wretched her two companions looked,
Catherine rose from her chair. She was not tired&mdash;her
colour was as fresh and her eyes as bright as ever,
her mind full of impatient energy; but the powers of
the others had flagged.</p>

<p>"Go home and rest," she said to Harry. "Have
old Rule there to-morrow morning to meet me. I
will come to the bank to-morrow&mdash;I mean to-day&mdash;at
eight, before you open. Go home and go to bed."</p>

<p>"Not if I can be of any use to you, Aunt Catherine&mdash;or
to poor Ned."</p>

<p>Her foot made the same impatient movement upon
the carpet. "You can be of no use," she said, "dropping
asleep as you are: go and rest; at your age few
can do without sleep. And Hester, go too, you can do
no more." It was not without a half contempt that she
saw the overpowering of their young faculties by that
which to her was nothing. There are so many things
in which youth has the best of it, that age has a right
to its dolorous triumph when that comes. She went
down with Harry to the door to let him out, glad of
the movement, and stood in the early light for a
moment breathing in the fresh air. The birds were
all twittering, making their morning thanksgiving,
expressing their joy in the new day. Catherine
looked out sternly upon the light and gladness in
which she had no share. She thought again&mdash;should
she ever think of anything else?&mdash;of the last words
she had heard, and of his figure hurrying away in the<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_201" id="Page_201">[Pg 201]</a></span>
darkness, deaf to her cry. It was a relief to go in
again, even to see the poor little lamp flickering, and
the light bursting in at every crevice of the ineffectual
shutters. When she reached the room in
which they had been at work, Hester, who had
answered as far as her faculties could to every call
upon her, had dropped back into the great chair in
which she had been sitting, and had fallen asleep in
utter exhaustion. It was a curious scene. The
windows were all closed, and candles upon the table
still burning: but the light swept in from above, over
the top of the shutters, which were not so high as the
glass, and lighted up the room in a strange abstract
way like a studio or a prison. In the midst of this
pale and colourless illumination Hester's white face,
with the blue veins showing in it, in an attitude of
utter abandonment and exhaustion, pillowed upon
the dark cushions of the chair, was the central point;
her hand with the pen in it was still on the table, the
candles flickering with a yellow uncertain blaze.
Catherine went and stood by her for a moment and
looked at her. Tears were upon the girl's long eyelashes,
her mouth seemed still quivering, the faint
sound of a sob came out of her sleep. She looked
younger even than she was, like a child that had
cried itself asleep. Catherine looked at her with
many a thought. John Vernon's daughter, who had
all but ruined her father's house, and had wounded
her own pride, if not her heart, in the way women
feel most&mdash;and bitterer still, Edward's love, she, for
whom he had planned to betray her own better<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_202" id="Page_202">[Pg 202]</a></span>
claims, for whom he would have deserted her, for
whom he had ruined her, this time perhaps without
remedy. With a strange bitterness she looked at the
young creature thus fatally connected with all the
miseries of her life. It was not Hester's fault. The
table was covered with proofs of her submission and
obedience. If it was true that but for her perhaps
Catherine's power would never have been disturbed,
it was also true that but for her Catherine might
have been ruined irretrievably, she and all she prized
most. But this argument did not tell in the mind of
the woman who stood gazing at her, so much as the
look of utter infantile weariness, the broken sound of
the sleeping sob, the glitter upon her eyelashes. She
stood for a long time, and Hester never moved.
Then she took a shawl and covered the sleeper as
tenderly as her mother could have done it, and
began to pace softly up and down in that weird
clearness. She did not even extinguish the candles,
but left them there amid all the disarray of the table,
the scattered papers, covered with notes and figures.
The young can sleep, but not the old. The romantic
interest would be with Hester worn out with
wretchedness and weariness; but the heavier burden
was her own.</p>

<p>Perhaps had the truth been pursued to its depths
it gave a certain satisfaction to Catherine to find
herself at last left to contemplate alone that uttermost
and profoundest loss which was hers. The girl
slept though her heart might be broken; the woman
whose last hope he was, whose faith in human nature<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_203" id="Page_203">[Pg 203]</a></span>
was wound up in him, who believed in Edward, but
on earth in no one else, slept not, rested not, could
not forget. She walked from end to end of the room,
her hands clasped, her face in all its comely age
paled in a moment to the pallor of an old woman.
People had said that her colour was like a girl's still:
her eye was not dim nor her natural force abated.
But over her there had come this chill in a moment.
And where was he, the cause of it all? Flying fast
across the country somewhere, directing his way, no
doubt, to some port where he could get out of England.
For what, oh Heaven, for what? Was there
any sacrifice she would not have made for him? He
might have had his Hester, his own house like the
others, if that was what he wanted. There was
nothing, nothing she would have grudged him! She
would have asked no gratitude, made no conditions.
He should have had his freedom, and his love&mdash;whatever
he wanted. All this swept through her
mind as she went to and fro in that blue clearness of
the morning which swept down upon her from the
skies over all the weariness and disarray of the night.
Catherine did not ask herself what she would have
said, all things being well, if she had been asked to
consent to the effacing of herself, which now it seemed
would have been so easy a solution of the problem.
It seemed to her now that in love she would have
granted all he could ask for, and in pride she certainly
would have done it, scorning to ask how he
could resign her so easily. Love and pride combined
wrung her heart between them now. Up and down,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_204" id="Page_204">[Pg 204]</a></span>
up and down with a soft monotonous motion she
walked unsubdued while the others sank. Her old
frame felt no weariness, her old heart was yet high.
She could no more sink down and acknowledge
herself beaten, than she could drop her head and
sleep like Hester. With impatience and an energy
unbroken she waited for the day.</p>

<p>Catherine's carriage stood outside the bank at
eight o'clock in the morning, to the wonder yet
admiration of the town. "Old as she is, she's an
example to the young ones," the people said: though
there were darker rumours, too, that one of the
young men had gone wrong, and that it was a sharp
and speedy inquiry into this that had brought
Catherine into the town without delay. The still
closed door was opened to her by Harry, who was
pale with his sleepless night and with the anxiety
from which he could now find no escape. Behind
Harry was old Rule, who came forward with a face
like a mute at a funeral, his hands held up, his
countenance distorted with grief and sympathy. "Oh,
my dear lady!" he cried; "oh, Miss Catherine, has
it come to this? Who could suppose that you and I
should meet together a second time in this way?"</p>

<p>Catherine made a sudden gesture of impatience.
"How do you know what the way is until you
hear?" she said. She sat down at the table where
she had sat so often. Her old look of command, the
energy and life of old, seemed in her face; if it was
paled and jaded, the others, who were more shaken
still than she, had no eyes to see it. The three were<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_205" id="Page_205">[Pg 205]</a></span>
deep in their work before the clerks appeared, one
by one, all those who were of any weight in the
place, or cared for Vernon's, asking anxiously if
anything was known of Mr. Edward. When they
were met by the astonishing statement "Miss Vernon
is here," the announcement was received in different
ways, but with great excitement. "Then all is right,"
said one; but another shook his head. "All must
be very wrong," he said, "or Catherine Vernon would
not be here." It was the cashier who uttered these
words. He was an old servant of the bank, and had
been a junior at the time when old Rule was head
clerk and Catherine the soul of everything. After a
while he was sent for into the mysterious room
towards which the attention of every one was now
directed. There old Mr. Merridew was shown in
with solemnity on his brows, and various others of
the fathers of the town. Even outside there seemed
a little excitement about to the anxious spectators
within. If it had been market-day there might
have been a run on the bank. As it was, there
were one or two little groups about, anxiously
noting the grave faces of the visitors. All day long
they came and went; the great books were all
spread about upon the table within, and when the
door opened sometimes one anxious face would be
seen, sometimes another. One of the younger men
passing the door saw Catherine herself explaining
and urging something upon the chief of the Bank
of England in Redborough, who had joined the
conclave. It was clearly then, they all felt, a matter<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_206" id="Page_206">[Pg 206]</a></span>
of life and death. Some wine and biscuits were
taken in in the middle of the day, but no one went
away for luncheon, no one had time or leisure for
any such thought. Mr. Pounceby, who was Catherine's
solicitor, stayed by her all day long, while
the others went and came. The clerks, when their
day's work was done, left this secret conclave still
sitting. The cashier and the head clerk were
detained after the others. The younger men went
away with an alarmed sense that Vernon's might
never open again.</p>

<p>And this impression was so far justified that the
councillors, almost without exception, thought so too.
There had been found in Edward's room at the
Grange a bundle of papers, securities taken by him
from the safe at the bank. The greater part had
been abstracted, but the few that were left showed
too clearly what methods he had adopted. The
bank itself was worth aiding. Its prestige as yet
was scarcely touched; but how were these deficiencies
to be made up, how was it to be worked
without money, and how was its credit to be restored?
Catherine had not now the independent
fortune which on the former occasion she had thrown
into the common stock with proud confidence in
Vernon's. It had all been repaid her, but it had
remained in the business, and if Vernon's now were
to be made an end of, was gone. That did not
affect the mind of the proud old woman. She
thought nothing of herself or her fortune. She sat
unwearied, meeting one man after another, who a<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_207" id="Page_207">[Pg 207]</a></span>
week or two ago had been obsequious to her, without
wincing, ready to hear all their doubts, to bear the
shakings of their heads, their blame of the culpable
negligence that had left everything in one man's
hand&mdash;their denunciations of Edward, the eager
advantage they took of that right to find fault and
reproach which is put into the hands of every man
who is asked to help. Catherine faltered at first,
when she found that to save Edward's character,
to smooth away his guilt, and make excuses for him
was impossible. These angry men would not hear a
word of apology. He was a swindler to them and
nothing more. "Pardon me, my dear Miss Vernon,
but I always thought the confidence you showed in
that young fellow excessive." "He should not have
been permitted a tithe of the power he had. It
was not just to others who were far more deserving."
"If you mean me, I was no more to be matched with
Edward than a tortoise is with a hare," said Harry.
Catherine put out her hand to him under the table
and gave his hand such a pressure, delicate as hers
was, as almost made the strong young fellow cry out;
but at the same time she silenced him with a look,
and bore it all. She bore everything&mdash;the long
hours of contention, of explanation, of censure, of
excuse, of anxious pointing out again and again of
the strong points in her case. She argued it all out
with every individual, and again with every combination
of them, when two or three together would
return to the old objections, the difficulties they had
originally started, and which again and again had<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_208" id="Page_208">[Pg 208]</a></span>
been argued away, with no doubt the natural special
pleading of all who speak in their own defence.
During this continually repeated process Harry would
stand behind her with his face of trouble, watching
the countenances of the speakers, now and then
blurting out something (the reverse of judicious in
most cases), shuffling with uneasy feet upon the
floor; sometimes, poor fellow, there being nothing
else in his power, holding her elbow with the idea
of supporting her, kneeling down to put her footstool
straight; while old Mr. Rule, sitting at a little
distance, equally anxious, equally eager, not of
importance enough to speak, would come in with
a quavering "Miss Vernon explained all that, sir&mdash;"
"As Miss Vernon has already said, sir&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>She alone showed little anxiety and no distress.
She was as dignified as if she had been entertaining
them at her table, as she had done so often. She
bore those repetitions of the old objections with
composure. She did not get impatient, twisting and
turning in her chair like Mr. Rule, or crushing her
impatience under foot like Harry. She was like an
Indian at the stake: or rather like a prime minister
in his place in Parliament. The hundred times
repeated argument, the old doubt brought up again,
all afresh with shakings of the head, the stolid little
compliments to her as a woman so much superior to
her sex, her masculine understanding (good lack!
wonderful, though not equal to those whom she had
convinced over and over again, yet who began again
next moment where they had left off), all this she<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_209" id="Page_209">[Pg 209]</a></span>
put up with without shrinking. Oh, the dulness of
them, the unconvinceableness, the opaque vision, the
impotent hearts! But she made no sign that she
perceived. She sat still and held her own. She had
the best of the argument in logic, but not, alas, in
power. Ten mortal hours had struck by the time
the last of her visitors hastened away to his dinner,
promising to think of it, yet shaking his head.
Catherine leant her head upon the back of her high
chair and closed her eyes; the tears came to them in
the relief of having no more to say. She was so
pallid and so worn now that they both rushed to
her in silent terror. She opened her eyes with an
astonished look. "I hope you do not think I am
going to faint; I never faint," she said.</p>

<p>Ten hours! She walked to her carriage with a
foot lighter and firmer than that of Harry, upon
whose fine physique and troubled soul this day had
wrought more havoc than the severest football. She
would not allow her old friend and servant to come
to the door with her.</p>

<p>"Don't tire yourself," she said. "You have so
much to do for us yet. I think we shall pull
through."</p>

<p>"God bless you, Miss Catherine," said the old
man; "if we pull through it will be your doing."</p>

<p>"What merit is that?" she said quickly. "Why
should God bless me for that? It is for myself."</p>

<p>"Oh, my dear lady," cried the old clerk. "I know
you better than you do yourself. It is for Vernon's<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_210" id="Page_210">[Pg 210]</a></span>
and not for you. And Vernon's means the honest
living of many a family. It means&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Don't tell me what it means," she cried, putting
up her hands. "It means downfall and shame now.
It means a broken heart, Mr. Rule."</p>

<p>"No, no," he cried. "No, no, we'll get through.
I'll come back if you'll let me, and Mr. Harry will
work like a hero."</p>

<p>She gave Harry a strange glance. There was in
it a gleam of repugnance, an air of asking pardon.
She could not endure the contrast which it was not
possible to refrain from making. He, standing by
her, so dutiful, so kind, while the other who had
ruined her, fled away. She could have struck him
with her nervous hand, which now was trembling;
she could have made a humble confession to him of
the injuries she had done him in her heart. She
could bear the old town dignitaries, the men of
money, better than this.</p>

<p>"May I go with you?" he said, supporting her
with his arm, bending over her with his fair countenance
full of trouble and sympathy.</p>

<p>She could have struck him for being so good and
true. Why was he true, and the other&mdash; Better,
better if they had both been alike, both traitors, and
left her to bear it by herself.</p>

<p>"No, Harry," she said; "no, Harry, let me be
alone."</p>

<p>He kissed her hand, poor boy, with a piteous look,
and she felt it wet with a tear. Nor did she<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_211" id="Page_211">[Pg 211]</a></span>
misunderstand him. She knew it was for her he was
sorry. She knew even that he was the one alone
who would stand up for the absent, and excuse him
and pity him. All this she knew, and it was intolerable
to her, and yet the best and sweetest thing
that was in her lot.</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_212" id="Page_212">[Pg 212]</a></span></p>




<h2><a name="CHAPTER_XII" id="CHAPTER_XII">CHAPTER XLII.</a></h2>

<h3>AFTERWARDS.</h3>


<p>Hester woke next morning in an unfamiliar room
with a consciousness of something strange and terrible
that had happened, she could not tell what, that
first sensation before memory awakens which is one
of the most bitter indications of having entered upon
the world of evil. So the guilty pair in Paradise, in
the morning of the world, must have woke out of
their sleep, and felt, before remembrance came, the
sense of ill. She scarcely remembered how she had
been transported to that bed. She had slept for
sorrow, calamity crushing all her unused faculties,
and her first waking sensation was one of trouble
and wonder what it was. She had not long to wait
before the whole came rushing back upon her mind.
She gave a low cry, and all her wounds began to
bleed anew&mdash;nay, she felt them as for the first time,
for last night's terror and commotion and misery
were like a dream to her. When she uttered that
cry, there was a soft stir in the room, and a little,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_213" id="Page_213">[Pg 213]</a></span>
noiseless figure, and anxious face appeared at her
bedside.</p>

<p>"Mother!" Hester cried, with a voice of dismay.</p>

<p>"Yes, my darling, I am here. Catherine was so
good as to send for me. She said you had received
a great shock. She went out herself very early, so
that you need not be afraid of being disturbed,
Hester. And what is it, my dear? She would not
give me any satisfaction. She said you had behaved
very well, and had been the means of giving her
valuable information. I am very glad of that anyhow,
Hester. I always told you she was kind in the
main. If you and she should be better friends after
this it would be a great pleasure to me."</p>

<p>There was anxiety in Mrs. John's plaintive face,
but it was confined to the fear lest her daughter's
health should be affected, and to a little uncertainty
whether the relations with Catherine might be
improved or injured by this mysterious event,
whatever it was.</p>

<p>"She has been very kind, mamma."</p>

<p>"I was sure of it, my dear. Catherine has a way
with her that is not very&mdash;<i>nice</i>&mdash;sometimes. But
then we all have some fault. I was to ring for tea
as soon as you were awake. That maid, after all,
though I have always had a prejudice against her, is
kind too, in her way. She has made me most comfortable.
I have always observed in my life, Hester,
that when you get to know people you so often think
better of them than when&mdash; That has been my
experience. Do you feel able to take some breakfast,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_214" id="Page_214">[Pg 214]</a></span>
dear? or will you get up first? You are to do
exactly as you please."</p>

<p>Hester lay still with a little moan, and made no
reply. She would have liked to turn her face to the
wall, to beg that the light of day might be shut
out, that she might be left to make acquaintance
with her trouble. But none of these things were
possible. Her mother's gentle face shining upon her
with so much easy anxiety, and so little conception
of anything under the surface, brought her to herself
as nothing else could have done. Why should she
be troubled with these anguishes that were beyond
her? The girl raised herself with that heroism of
necessity which is more effectual than mere will.
Mrs. John would weep with her, and make up to her
with a thousand caresses for the loss of her lover,
when she came to understand it; but she would
never understand the burden that was on Hester's
soul. The girl said to herself that it must be borne
silently, that there must be no further betrayal.
She begged her mother to leave her a little, while
she got up.</p>

<p>"I have had a long sleep. I am quite myself
again," she said.</p>

<p>"You look pale," said Mrs. John, kissing her. "You
have had a shock, and you have never told me yet
what it was. But perhaps, on the whole, the best
thing you can do is to get up; breakfast in bed is not
very comfortable. I will go and have a good look at
Catherine's pretty things in the drawing-room&mdash;she
has some nice china&mdash;and come back in half an hour<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_215" id="Page_215">[Pg 215]</a></span>
or so. Don't hurry, my darling, but it is such a
lovely morning; it will do you good to have some
fresh air."</p>

<p>When Hester was left alone she tried to think,
but could not. Scenes came back to her as in a
theatre&mdash;the meeting at the gate, and all that passed
there; Catherine's appearance, and the force with
which Edward flung her away from him, and set out
into the dark, into the unknown. Why&mdash;why had
he done it? Was it in a sudden fit of passion, which
he had repented of? Was it in the terror of being
discovered&mdash;and out of that suspicion and opposition,
and gloomy distrust which had always been in his
mind towards Catherine? And then the railway
would rise before her mind&mdash;the crowd and noise,
and wild unnaturalness of everything, the disappointment
which to her at heart was a relief. Had he
not gone after all? What if a better thought had
struck him? What if, when they all went to the
bank, thinking him a traitor, they should find him
there, throwing light on everything, putting the
wrong right? Hester raised her head again when
this thought came into her mind. Was it not after
all the most likely, the most natural thought? A
man does wrong by temptation, by evil companions,
by the leading on of one wrong thing after another;
but when he is brought to a pause, when there is a
distinct call upon him, when he is made to see
beyond dispute what his duty is, is it not natural,
certain, that he must do it? So she said to herself.
For a moment all the clouds flew away, a warm<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_216" id="Page_216">[Pg 216]</a></span>
exhilaration took possession of her. Then there
floated up before her eyes another scene&mdash;the table
round which they had sat in the dead of night;
Harry with his troubled face opposite to her; Catherine
paramount in her energy and rapidity; she
herself putting down upon paper, so quickly that her
fingers alone moved and her mind had no share but
the most broken and imperfect one, what she was
told to write. If he had come back, if he was
working now at the re-establishment of everything,
could Edward ever forgive them? What matter,
what matter, she cried, so long as he set himself
right, so long as Vernon's stood by his help and did
not fall? From all this it will be seen that nothing
of the despair which in reality and in reflection had
overwhelmed all the other chief actors in the drama,
had touched Hester. To her everything was still
possible, and Edward's vindication, Edward's repentance,
the chief, the most natural event of all.</p>

<p>"Well, my dear, are you ready?" said Mrs. John.
"There is quite a nice breakfast waiting for you down
stairs. Catherine's maid (whom I really was unjust
to, Hester, for she is a very nice woman when you
come to know her) insisted upon making you some
chocolate instead of tea: for it would be more
sustaining, she said, in case you should not be disposed
to eat. I don't know why she should think
you would not be disposed to eat. I told her you
always liked your breakfast. But come, my dear,
come, I am sure you must want something. Did
you find the clean things I brought you? Oh I<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_217" id="Page_217">[Pg 217]</a></span>
thought you would be better in a nice clean print,
instead of that dark thing; but you have put on the
old one all the same."</p>

<p>"It is best for me to-day," Hester said.</p>

<p>She thought to herself if it all turned out as she
hoped, with what joy she would return to her summer
garments in the evening, even if it might be that
Edward had broken with her for ever. She thought
this almost certain, for had she not turned against
him? but this was not the question paramount in her
mind. There was but one thing all important, that
he should have returned to his post. Mrs. John was
greatly surprised at the wisdom of that prevision
on the part of Catherine's maid. How could she
have foreseen that Hester, a healthy girl, with generally
a healthy appetite, would turn away almost
with loathing from the dainty food, the pretty tray,
the careful provision made for her? She swallowed
the chocolate hastily at her mother's entreaty: the
very air of the house, those stairs and passages, all
flooded with light, which had painted themselves on
her recollection in the darkness, filled Hester with a
sense of the intolerable. She made haste to get out,
to get away, to take her mother home.</p>

<p>"Don't you think it will only be polite to wait till
Catherine comes back?" Mrs. John said. "You must
remember, dear, that she has been very kind to you;
and nothing could be kinder than her note, and
sending the carriage for me this morning, and all. I
think we ought to wait and thank her for her kindness.
She will think it strange that we should go<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_218" id="Page_218">[Pg 218]</a></span>
away without a word. Well, if you think it really will
be better to come back in the afternoon, Hester&mdash;Has
Catherine gone out to spend the day? That is quite
unusual, surely for her&mdash;but however, of course it is
not our business. Lean on my arm, my dear. I am
sure, as you say, the air will do you good."</p>

<p>The air did not do Hester good: the shade of the
holly-tree lying motionless upon the road, the half
open gate at which Catherine had appeared in the darkness,
the strange intelligence that seemed to be in
every bush, as if these inanimate things knew and
remembered what had been done and said in secret,
seemed to bring conviction, and force back upon her
all the scenes she had gone through of which her
innocent mother knew nothing. And every inch of
the way recalled her own proud, eager thoughts of
the night before, the desperation with which she had
gone to that meeting, determined upon her protest
and refusal, yet never sure that she would ever retrace
these steps again. To retrace them now as she was
doing, with her mother's gentle talk in her ears, the
occasional mild question which it was so easy to
elude, the praises of Catherine which her supposed
kindness called forth so easily, seemed an incredible
thing. Mrs. John enjoyed the walk. It was seldom
she went out in the morning, and the excitement of
her daughter's absence all night, of Catherine's
explanations, of the drawing together of some new
and closer bond between Hester and the head of the
Vernon society&mdash;the most important person of all
the kindred&mdash;gave her a secret exhilaration. There<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_219" id="Page_219">[Pg 219]</a></span>
had not been such a sensation in the Vernonry for
months as that which had been caused that morning
by the sight of Catherine's well-known brougham,
sent for Mrs. John! It might be that in future this
would be no rare sight: it might be&mdash;but the poor
lady scarcely knew how to contain the satisfaction
with which she saw the vista opening up before her
of Hester's promotion and favour with Catherine.
Valuable information! She was proud of what
seemed to her like the highest praise. She always
knew that her Hester, so much superior as she was to
other girls&mdash;&mdash;if Catherine but knew her as she
deserved to be known. And then she asked with
pleasant expectation&mdash;</p>

<p>"What was the information, Hester, that you gave
Catherine? I am so glad that you were able to tell
her something she didn't know. I was quite in a
flutter when I got her note last night; but of course
it was perfectly right for you to stay when she wished
it. I shall tell her I am so much obliged to her for
having taken such good care of you. It gave me
quite a fright for the moment, but I soon got over
it. And Emma, you know, went away at last by the
night train."</p>

<p>Thus Mrs. John diverted her own attention and
never pressed a question. But it is impossible to
tell how deserted, how silent, how far out of the
world and life the little rooms at the Vernonry looked
after the agitation of the night. Hester could not
rest in them: the summer forenoon seemed a twelve-month
long. She could not take up any of her<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_220" id="Page_220">[Pg 220]</a></span>
usual occupations. She was afraid to meet any one,
to be questioned perhaps more closely than her
mother had questioned her. Her heart was away, it
was not in this place. In the pauses of Mrs. John's
gentle talk she felt her own thoughts thronging upon
her almost audibly. It seemed impossible that other
people, that even her mother, unsuspicious as she
was, should not find her out. And how slow, how
slow were those sunshiny minutes, sixty of them in
an hour! The time of the early dinner came, and
again Hester turned from the food. Mrs. John began
to be alarmed. "If it goes on like this I shall have
to send for the doctor," she said.</p>

<p>Hester hastened out as soon as the meal was over
to escape from her mother's comments. It seemed
to her that she recognised some new knowledge in
the keen glances of the sisters, and in Mr. Mildmay
Vernon's grin as he sat over his newspaper in the
summer-house. And she was afraid of the old Morgans,
who had more insight. The surroundings of the
house altogether were odious to her&mdash;unnecessary
things that had nothing to do with those real affairs
and mysteries of living which were being solved
elsewhere. She asked herself wistfully, whether it
was not time for her to go back: though if Catherine
had not returned, what could she do but cause
suspicion if she went to the empty house? To be
even in the empty house would be something&mdash;it
would be so much nearer the scene in which everything
was going on. While she stood with her hand
curved over her forehead looking out upon the road,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_221" id="Page_221">[Pg 221]</a></span>
with her eyes "busy in the distance shaping things
that made her heart beat quick," the old captain came
up to her. She thought he was paler than usual, and
his eyes were troubled. He had laid his hand on
her shoulder before she heard his approach, so
absorbed was she in her own thoughts. He took her
by the arm in his fatherly way&mdash;</p>

<p>"Come with me, Hester, and talk to my old
woman," he said.</p>

<p>It was with a great start that she turned to him,
trembling with nervousness all unknown to the
Hester of yesterday.</p>

<p>"Is she ill?" she cried, scarcely knowing what she
said; and then with a vague smile, "I forgot. Emma
is gone, and she is missing&mdash;"</p>

<p>"It is not Emma we are thinking of. Hester, tell
me," said the old man, leading her away with her arm
in his, "what is this about Catherine? What has
happened? Your mother told us you were there all
night, and now to-day&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"What do they say has happened?" cried Hester
with a gasp of suspense.</p>

<p>"I cannot make head nor tail of it. I hear that
one of the young men has gone wrong; that Catherine
is at the bank; that there are great defalcations;
that he went off last night&mdash;&mdash;I can testify," cried
Captain Morgan, querulously, "that he did not go
away last night, for I was there."</p>

<p>Hester looked up at him with a face from which
all colour had fled.</p>

<p>"Is it known who it is? are you sure he has not<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_222" id="Page_222">[Pg 222]</a></span>
come back? Oh, I have a feeling," she cried, "a
feeling in my heart that he has come back!"</p>

<p>"My child," said the old captain, "you may trust
her and me. Whatever it is, it is safe with her and
me."</p>

<p>Mrs. Morgan was sitting at the window in her
summer place; her placid brow had a cloud upon
it, but was not agitated like her husband's.</p>

<p>"Have you come back to us, Hester?" she said.
"We thought we had lost you. If you can satisfy
his mind with anything you can say, do it, my
dear."</p>

<p>"What can I say?" Hester cried. "We are all in
great trouble. I don't know which is the greatest,
but I cannot tell you secrets that are not mine. Dear
Mrs. Morgan, tell the captain so. Whatever I know
it is by accident. I think I shall die with anxiety
and suspense, but there is nothing I can say."</p>

<p>"My dear, you will not die, you will live to be
anxious many another day. Rowley, my old man,
you hear the child. We must not ask her another
question. Wait, as you have waited many a time
before. It is all in the Lord's hands."</p>

<p>The old man was wiping the moisture from his
forehead: he had seated himself as soon as he came
in, his old limbs were shaking under him. His large,
colourless hands shook, holding his handkerchief.</p>

<p>"Mary," he said, "if it is my flesh and blood that
has brought this disturbance into the place, that has
seduced her boy, and brought down ruin on her
house, how am I ever to lift my head again?"</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_223" id="Page_223">[Pg 223]</a></span></p>

<p>The old lady looked at him with pathetic eyes, in
which there was a suffering as acute as his own,
softened and made almost bright by the patience and
calm that were habitual to her.</p>

<p>"Rowley, we are not thinking of Catherine, we are
thinking of ourselves," she said.</p>

<p>And then there was a pause. It seemed to Hester
that her own brokenheartedness was a sort of child's
passion in comparison. She said humbly&mdash;</p>

<p>"Will you tell me what you are afraid of? There
is nobody blamed but one. There is not a name
spoken of but one. I don't know if that is any comfort
to you, Captain Morgan."</p>

<p>"And the one is her boy, the apple of her eye, the
only one that she has trusted, her choice out of all
the world," the old lady said. "Oh be silent, be
silent, my old man! What is your pride to that? I
would rather I had a share of the burden&mdash;I would
like to be suffering with her." The tears stood in
the deep wells of those old eyes, which had wept so
much. She was past weeping now. "The Lord
forgive him and bring him back," she said.</p>

<p>"You mean punish him, you mean give him over
to the powers of darkness that he belongs to! What
does he deserve, a man that has used a woman like
that?"</p>

<p>"I am not asking what he deserves. I will tell
you what he would get if he would come back.
Pardon!" said the old woman with a sob, instinctively
putting out her old soft hands.</p>

<p>"I am not for pardon," said the captain vehemently,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_224" id="Page_224">[Pg 224]</a></span>
his head moving in his agitation, his hands
shaking. "I am for every soul bearing its own
burden. Here is a woman that has spread prosperity
around her. She has been kind, even when she has
not been merciful. The grateful and the ungrateful,
she has been good to them all. She has been like
the sun shining and the rain raining upon both just
and unjust. And here is the end of her, stung to
her heart by the child of her bosom. For it will be
the end of her. She is a grand woman. She won't
bear being deceived."</p>

<p>"Do not say that," said Hester; "she is so strong,
stronger than any of us&mdash;if you had seen her last
night!"</p>

<p>"Where could I have seen her last night?" he
said quickly; then, with a smile, "that is all you
know, you children. Yes, stronger than any one of
you, able to do everything. Do you remember the
French boy in Browning's ballad, Hester, that could
not bear it when his Emperor asked if he were
wounded? 'I'm killed, sire!' That is like Catherine.
She stands like a tower. I can see her in my
mind's eye. She needs no sleep, no rest: but she is
killed for all that."</p>

<p>Hester rose to her feet as he spoke in an excitement
she could not control.</p>

<p>"I must go," she said. "I must go&mdash;I might be
wanted."</p>

<p>The old man rose and hobbled out after her. He
followed her to the gate.</p>

<p>"I will wait while you get your hat. I am coming<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_225" id="Page_225">[Pg 225]</a></span>
with you," he said. "We cannot rest, Hester,
neither you nor I."</p>

<p>Mrs. John was dozing in her chair as she generally
did in the afternoon. She opened her eyes and said,
"Are you going for a walk, dear?" then closed them
tranquilly again. The very atmosphere in the brown
wainscotted parlour breathed of peace and quiet
uncongenial with any such throbbings as those in
Hester's heart. She joined the old man, who was
waiting for her at the door, and they went on together,
saying little. The great window in the
Grange where Catherine usually sat commanding
the road was vacant. There was a certain deserted
air about the place. They knew without a word
that Catherine was still out of it.</p>

<p>"It is too far for you to go," Hester said.</p>

<p>Though they had not spoken for a long time they
understood each other <i>&agrave; demi-mot</i>.</p>

<p>"It is too far for me," said he, "but what does
that matter? everything will soon be too far for me.
Let me go on while I can."</p>

<p>They walked as far as the bank, where their
anxious eyes made out the people lingering about,
the air of curiosity and excitement. Old Captain
Morgan hobbled up to Mr. Merridew, who was making
his way out with a serious face. "You will excuse me
for my anxiety, sir," he said, "but will you tell me if
Miss Vernon is there, and what is going on?"</p>

<p>"That is an easy question you are asking me,"
said Mr. Merridew, eying him closely; "certainly
Miss Vernon is there."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_226" id="Page_226">[Pg 226]</a></span></p>

<p>"I am her near relation," said the old man, "and
you are connected with her by marriage."</p>

<p>"I know very well who you are, Captain Morgan:
a distinguished officer, though people have not found
it out here. If you can lend Miss Vernon substantial
help I advise you to do it at once."</p>

<p>Captain Morgan drew back a little: he gave
Hester a pathetic glance. They retired slowly with
lingering steps from the vicinity of Vernon's. They
understood all without knowing anything.</p>

<p>"There is the bitterness of having nothing," said
the old captain, "and that man knew it, Hester. I
would coin myself if I could, for her, and yet I
cannot help her." Neither of them knew about
business, nor how men like Mr. Merridew, who had
been listening all day long to Catherine's explanations
and arguments without being moved, could save
the bank still if they would. But they felt in their
hearts the dull opposition of his face, the shake of his
head, the nature of his advice to one whom he knew
to be a poor man, to help her now. "Money is a
wonderful thing," said Captain Morgan; "it can do
so much and yet so little. If you or I were rich as
we are poor, we could make Catherine think for half
an hour that she had surmounted everything."</p>

<p>"Why for half an hour, Captain Morgan?" said
Hester.</p>

<p>"Because, my dear, at the end of that time
Vernon's being safe, there would come back upon
her that from which neither heaven nor earth can
deliver her."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_227" id="Page_227">[Pg 227]</a></span></p>

<p>"Oh, Captain Morgan, do not say so. Cannot
Heaven, cannot God, deliver from everything?"
cried Hester, with a sense of horror.</p>

<p>"Ay, in a way that He uses always at the end&mdash;by
death. At least we think death will do that for
us; but it is only a guess even then. How otherwise?"
said the old man, raising his dim old eyes
beneath their heavy lids. "What is done cannot
be undone. If the boy were to be touched with
compunction too late and come back, even that
would not restore the past."</p>

<p>"Why not?" she said, "why not? We could
forgive him." It was the first acknowledgment she
had made of any share in the catastrophe.</p>

<p>"Forgive him! You speak as if that could change
anything! What is your forgiveness? You seem to
think it is a thing, not so many words." Then after
they had gone a little while in silence the old man
burst forth again. "You could forgive him! A man
wants not forgiveness, but to make up for his sins.
You think it is like giving him a fortune to give him
your pardon, as if he could set up again, and make a
new beginning upon that. Forgiveness may save a
man's soul, but it does not save his honour or his
life. You could have him back and let him live
upon you, and eat out your hearts with his baseness
trying to make it show like virtue. But Catherine
is too noble a creature for that," cried the old captain.
"Thank God she has never been broken down
to that."</p>

<p>This torrent of words overwhelmed Hester; they<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_228" id="Page_228">[Pg 228]</a></span>
had turned into the quiet road again, and the girl
fell into a low sobbing and weeping as she went.
She was too much overstrained to be able to
control herself. Yet her heart struggled against this
sentence.</p>

<p>"If you love any one is it only while he is good?"
she said. "Is it noble to cast him from you because
he has gone wrong? Then what is love or faithfulness?
Are they nothing&mdash;nothing?"</p>

<p>She knew now that he had not come back. Honour
had not moved him, nor love, nor any nobler impulse.
She could have flung herself upon the earth in her
misery. She felt that a touch now would be too
much&mdash;that she could bear nothing further. And
her companion saw that she was beyond the reach of
any argument. He was silent, and they moved
slowly along together, he tottering on his aged
limbs, scarcely able to get along.</p>

<p>"Soon everything will be too far for me," he said
with a half-pleased, almost satisfied nodding of his
head. It took them a long time to get home, and
the old captain was so worn out that he could not
rise from his chair again that evening. He and his
old wife sat sadly, saying something to each other
once in half an hour. They could think of nothing
but Catherine. They kept up their broken musing
discussion upon her and her fate as the slow summer
evening again crept silently by.</p>

<p>But Hester could not rest. She satisfied her
mother easily that it was right she should go back
to the Grange and find out if she could be of use.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_229" id="Page_229">[Pg 229]</a></span></p>

<p>"It is what I was going to suggest, my dear," said
Mrs. John. "If Edward Vernon is away, as you say,
and nobody with her, she must be lonely. And if
there is any trouble besides&mdash;though you have never
rightly explained to me what it was. No no, dear, I
don't mean to say it is your fault. No doubt you
have told me, and I have not taken it up. To be
sure, Hester, you must go; and though I cannot bear
to be without you, yet if Catherine wants you, and
she is in trouble, stay. I am sure she would do as
much for me," said the simple soul, without any cold
breathings of doubt. She went to the gate with
Hester, and when she came back could not help
giving her neighbours a little sketch of the state of
affairs. "My Hester has gone back to the Grange,"
she said, "she will probably stay there all night.
Catherine Vernon wrote me the nicest note to tell
me my child had been of so much use to her; that
is always gratifying to a mother."</p>

<p>"Of use!" cried the ladies both together.
"Gracious goodness, what can be going to happen?
Hester of use!" cried one sister. "And to
Catherine!" said the other. "Dear Catherine,
she tells you so to please you&mdash;when probably she
is thinking you the greatest bore&mdash;"</p>

<p>"She likes something new to experiment upon,"
said Mr. Mildmay Vernon with a snarl. Mrs. John
was much discouraged by this reception of her news.
She said&mdash;</p>

<p>"You little know my child if you think she will
be experimented upon," holding her head high; but<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_230" id="Page_230">[Pg 230]</a></span>
when she got indoors she cried a little over their
ill-nature. If it had been one of them who had
been chosen how different would have been their
tone. Had the brougham been sent express for Miss
Matilda or Miss Martha, what airs they would have
given themselves! and Mrs. John knew that she
had given herself no airs: she had not said a word.
But she could not be silent about the promotion of
her child.</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_231" id="Page_231">[Pg 231]</a></span></p>




<h2><a name="CHAPTER_XIII" id="CHAPTER_XIII">CHAPTER XLIII.</a></h2>

<h3>AN INTERRUPTION.</h3>


<p>Catherine was in her usual chair in the familiar
room where she had lived for so many years. These
walls had witnessed most of the pleasantnesses and
disappointments of her life; within them she had
grown into that amused spectatorship of all the
pranks of human creatures which it had pleased her
to think was her characteristic attitude, indulgent to
everybody, seeing through everybody. They had
never seen her in the aspect which she bore now,
beaten down under the stroke of fate. She was too
far gone even to be conscious of the extraordinary
irony of life which had made of the one only creature
to whom she had been consciously unjust, whom she
had considered from her childhood as an enemy, her
sole ministrant and sympathiser now. But she was not
conscious even of Hester's presence, who, overpowered
by a great awe of the suffering which she shared, kept
herself in the background, recognising, as so few
watchers do, that she was there for the sake of the
sorrowful woman whom she watched, and not at all<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_232" id="Page_232">[Pg 232]</a></span>
for her own. Catherine lay back in her chair, her
head thrown back, her eyelids half closed. She did
not move, except now and then to put up her hand
and dry the moisture which collected slowly under her
eyelids. It could not be called tears. It was that
extorted dew of pain which comes when the heart
seems pressed and crushed in some giant grasp. She
was not thinking, any more than it is inevitable to
think as long as life remains. She was only suffering,
nothing more. She could not make any head
against it. Her last stronghold had fallen. This it
is which makes calamity so terrible to the old. She
could not get beyond it. There was nothing, nothing
in her path but this, blocking it across with a darkness
that would never be dispersed. If he had died
she would have known she could not remain long
behind him, and the gloom would have been but a
mist between; but he had not died. The thought of
searching for him through the world, of holding out
succour to him when he came to need, of forgiving,
that last prerogative of love, was scarcely in her
nature. It was hers rather to feel that deep impossibility
of re-beginning, the misery and pain of any
struggle to make the base seem noble, which is as
true a sentiment as the other. She could not have
done it. To many women it is the highest form of
self-abnegation as it is the bitterest lot that can be
borne on earth; but to Catherine it would not have
been possible. The blow to her was final. There
was but one thing&mdash;to fight for Vernon's to the last
gasp, to ward off disgrace and failure from the name,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_233" id="Page_233">[Pg 233]</a></span>
to keep the ground it had occupied so long, against
possibility, against hope; but after that no more&mdash;no
more. She had borne herself bravely as long as any
eye was upon her, betraying nothing; and had sat
down to table and tried to eat, with that utter self-mastery
which will sustain the life it loathes with
sedulous care so long as it is necessary&mdash;talking to
Hester at intervals, giving Marshall directions as if
nothing had happened. She had been first impatient,
then satisfied to find the girl there. Her presence
was a help in that needful struggle.</p>

<p>Catherine went up stairs after dinner as usual.
Nothing was changed; but when she had attained to
that shelter, she could do no more. She put back
her head and closed her eyes, and gave herself up to
the endurance of her death-blow. At the other end
of the room Hester sat motionless. A keen-sighted
spectator would have seen the outline of her figure
in her dark dress, but nothing more. She was
watching, forgetting her own share, intent upon the
other. Her mind was full of what the old captain
had said, "I'm killed, sire." Hester watched with a
great awe, wondering if even thus, in the silence,
without any more demonstration, a woman might die.
She thought in her heart it would be well; but being
so young she was afraid. And the silence was so
deep, more deep than life could tolerate. She
watched eagerly for that sole movement, the lifting
of Catherine's hand to dry away the moisture from
her eyes.</p>

<p>This stillness was broken suddenly by a loud<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_234" id="Page_234">[Pg 234]</a></span>
knocking at the door&mdash;a continued volley of knocks,
accompanied by the sound of voices outside. Then
this sound surged inwards, and hasty steps were
heard rushing up stairs. Hester's heart leaped to
her mouth. It could not be that <i>he</i> would come
back with such a noise and outcry; but yet a sort of
frantic hope took possession of her as she rose to her
feet. Catherine had raised herself too, and sat with
her eyes widely open fixed upon the door. They
had not long to wait. The door was flung open,
dashing against a cabinet which stood near, with a
superfluity of noise and emphasis; and, sweeping
away the silence before her, and every possibility of
calm, Ellen Merridew burst into the room, her eyes
inflamed with crying, her fair countenance streaked
with red, her light locks standing up round her face.
She was followed by her husband, trying to hold her
back, and by Marshall in the rear, eager&mdash;under a
respectable semblance of attending the hasty visitors&mdash;to
give accuracy to the floating suspicions of the
servants' hall, and find out what it was all about.
Ellen rushed in, and gazed about her wildly.</p>

<p>"Where is he?" she cried. "Oh, Aunt Catherine,
where is he? You are hiding him, I said you
would hide him, whatever he did. Oh, is it nothing
to you if he goes and ruins people that never did him
any harm?&mdash;young people like us that have all our
life before us, and a dear baby to be turned out upon
the world. Oh, Aunt Catherine, if you have any
heart at all, where is he, where is he? I'll have him
to justice!" cried Ellen. "I'll not sit under it. I<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_235" id="Page_235">[Pg 235]</a></span>
won't&mdash;not if he should kill me! I want Edward.
Where is Edward? I sha'n't go out of this till you
give him up to me. He has ruined us, he has ruined
us!" cried the excited creature, bursting into a
transport of passionate tears.</p>

<p>There had been a moment of bewildered struggle
in Catherine's face; then she rose up with what
seemed to the excited new comers her usual composure.</p>

<p>"What does all this mean?" she said, in her quiet
voice.</p>

<p>Hester had shut the door upon the servant's
curiosity; Ellen crying violently, and poor Algernon,
endeavouring vainly to console her, stood between
the two, in the centre of the room. It was all that
poor young Merridew could do not to weep too.</p>

<p>"I am sure you will forgive her, Miss Vernon," he
said, in faltering tones. "We are nearly out of our
senses. Oh, don't cry, my dearest; whatever they
do they can't part us, and I'll work for you and baby.
I'll work till I drop. Miss Vernon, if Edward's here&mdash;she
doesn't mean any harm. She is just off her
head, poor girl! and baby not a month old yet.
If you will only let us see him, I'll pledge my
word&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Algy, hold your tongue!" cried Ellen amidst
her sobs, stamping her foot. "Hold your tongue,
I tell you. She'll never, never give him up&mdash;never
till she's forced, I know that. She has always liked
that fellow better than the whole of us put together.
And we've every one kotoued to him for her sake.<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_236" id="Page_236">[Pg 236]</a></span>
He's been the head of everything, though he was
nothing but a poor&mdash;&mdash; And as frightened of her
as a dog, and hated her all the time. Oh yes, Aunt
Catherine, you may believe me or not, but whenever
there was a word about you, Edward was always
the worst. Of course we all had our remarks to
make, I don't say anything different; but he was
always the worst. And now he's gone, and led
Algy to his ruin," she cried, with another wild outburst.
"We have lost every penny. Do you hear
me, Aunt Catherine, do you hear me? We're
ruined, with a dear baby not a month old, and I
that have never got up my strength. Oh yes, Algy,
yes, dear. I know you'll work till you drop. But
what good will that do to me, to have you work
yourself to death, and to be left a widow at my age,
with a baby to support? And, Aunt Catherine, it
will all be your fault," cried Ellen. "Yes, it will be
your fault. If you hadn't made such a fuss about
him, who would have ever trusted him? It was
because of you I gave my consent. I said Aunt
Catherine will never let him come to harm. And
now here it has all come to smash, and me and Algy
are ruined. Oh, how can you have the heart? and
a dear innocent baby without a word to say for
himself! And me at my age&mdash;and poor Algy that
thought he was making so good a marriage when he
got one of the Vernons&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Nelly, Nelly, darling!" cried the poor young
fellow, "I married you because I loved you, not
because you were one of the Vernons."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_237" id="Page_237">[Pg 237]</a></span></p>

<p>"And he had a good right to think so," said Ellen
pushing away his caressing arm. "And they all
thought so&mdash;every one; and now they've turned
against me, and say I'm extravagant, and that I've
ruined him. Oh! me to have ruined him that
thought I was making a man of him! Aunt
Catherine! Will you let us all be sacrificed, every
one, only to keep Edward from harm?"</p>

<p>Catherine Vernon had sunk into her chair, but
there was something of the old look of the spectator
at a comedy again upon her face. The evening was
beginning to fall, and they did not see the almost
ghastly colour which had replaced the wonderful
complexion of which everybody once spoke.</p>

<p>"Make her sit down, Algernon, and stop this
raving," she said. "What has happened? I know
nothing of it. If you have any claims upon Vernon's
you will be paid with the rest&mdash;if we stand, till the
last penny, if we fall, to the utmost that can be paid.
I cannot say any more."</p>

<p>They both sat down and gazed at her with consternation
on their faces; even Ellen's tears dried
up as by magic. After she had stopped, they sat
staring as if stupefied. Then Ellen got up, and threw
herself at Catherine's feet with a cry of wild dismay.</p>

<p>"Aunt Catherine! you don't mean to say that you
cannot help us, that you cannot save us? Oh, Aunt
Catherine! don't be angry with me. I did not mean
to make you angry. I was always silly, you know.
You will help us, you will save Algy, you will pay
the money, won't you?" She crept close to<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_238" id="Page_238">[Pg 238]</a></span>
Catherine, and took her hand and kissed it, looking
up piteously, with tears streaming down her face.
"You'll do it for me, Aunt Catherine? Oh, though
I am silly I am fond of my husband. And he's so
good; he's never said it was my fault. And I always
knew you would put it right. Aunt Catherine! you
will put it right?"</p>

<p>Her voice rose into a shrill, despairing cry; then
she dropped down helpless, sobbing and moaning,
but still holding by Catherine's hand and her
dress, whatever she could grasp at, in a passion of
incredulity and despair.</p>

<p>Then Catherine, who had been so stately, sank
back into her chair.</p>

<p>"I can't bear any more," she said, "I can't bear
any more. For the love of God take her away!"</p>

<p>But it was only the sudden appearance of Harry
which put an end to this painful scene. He gathered
his sister up in his arms, while her husband was
ineffectually intreating and reasoning with her, and
carried her out of the room, with a severity and
sternness which silenced the young pair.</p>

<p>"Look here," he said, taking them into the
deserted library which had been Edward's room,
"we are all in the same box. He has ruined her
and us all. You, out of your own confounded folly,
the rest of us&mdash;I can't tell you how. He has ruined
<i>her</i>. God&mdash;forgive him!" cried Harry, with a long
pause, bringing out the last words with a violent
effort. "But, look here! The only hope we have
of pulling through is in her. They can't let Catherine<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_239" id="Page_239">[Pg 239]</a></span>
Vernon be ruined in Redborough. I don't think it's
in the heart of man to do it; but if we drive her
into her grave, as you've been trying to do&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Oh, Harry, how dare you say so! I only went
to her&mdash;where should I go?&mdash;and I thought it
would be all right. I thought it was dreadful, but
I never believed it, for I know Aunt Catherine&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Ellen, hold your tongue, for God's sake! If we
kill her, it's all up with us. Hasn't she got enough
to bear? I brought a cab when I knew you were
here. Take her home, Algy, and keep her quiet,
and let's meet and talk over it like men," Harry
said, severely.</p>

<p>He had never so asserted himself in all his life
before. They hurried her out between them to the
cab, much against Ellen's will, who wanted explanations,
and to know if it was true that Aunt Catherine
couldn't, couldn't if she would; and then told them,
sobbing, that if it was so, none of them could afford
to pay for a cab, and why, why should ruined people
spend a shilling when they had not got it? The
cabman heard part of these protestations, and
Marshall another part. But on the whole both
Algernon and Harry were more occupied with her
in her transport, more anxious for its consequences,
more tender of her, than if she had been the most
self-commanded and heroic woman in the world.</p>

<p>When this tempest of interruption swept away,
Catherine was still for a few minutes more. Then
she called Hester to her in a voice of exhaustion.</p>

<p>"I think," she said, "it has done me no harm.<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_240" id="Page_240">[Pg 240]</a></span>
Anything is better than that which&mdash;is always
behind. And I must do nothing to hurt myself
before to-morrow. Was not Harry there? He may
have something to tell me. Let him come and say
it to you. You are quick witted, and you will
understand; and if it is worth writing, write it
down. I will not take any part. I will keep still
here. If it rouses me, so much the better. If not,
you will listen for me with your young ears, and
forget nothing. I must save myself, you see, for
to-morrow."</p>

<p>"I will forget nothing," Hester said.</p>

<p>Catherine smiled faintly, with her eyes closed.</p>

<p>"I had thought of making you bring me some
wine. There is some Tokay in the cellar; but one
always pays for a strong stimulant, and this is the
better way. You are young, and you are a Vernon
too. Bend your mind to it. Think of nothing but
the business in hand."</p>

<p>"I will," said Hester, with solemnity, as if she
were pronouncing the words before a judge.</p>

<p>Catherine took hold of her dress when she was
going away.</p>

<p>"One thing," she said. "I think you and I have
hated each other because we were meant to love
each other, child."</p>

<p>"I think I have always done both," said Hester.</p>

<p>The faint sound that broke through the stillness
was not like Catherine's laugh. She patted the
girl's arm softly with her hand. Their amity was
too new to bear caresses.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_241" id="Page_241">[Pg 241]</a></span></p>

<p>"Now go and do your work, for your honour and
mine," she said.</p>

<p>It appeared that Harry had much to say. It was
strange to have to say it all to the young and eager
listener, her eyes glowing with interest and anxiety,
who was not content with any one statement, but
questioned and investigated till she had brought out
every point of meaning, while the real authority sat
by silent, her eyes closed, her hands clasped, like an
image of repose. Both the young people kept their
eyes upon her. There was not a movement which
Hester did not watch, while she exerted her faculties
to comprehend everything that Harry told her, and
put down everything that seemed at all important.
The impulse carried her over her own share of the
individual misery. Everything else disappeared
before the paramount importance of this. When
all that Harry had to say was said, there arose a
silence between them which had the effect which
nothing before had of rousing Catherine. She
opened her eyes and looked at them kindly.</p>

<p>"Everything has been done as I wished," she
said. "I have gleaned something, and the rest you
will tell me, Hester, to-morrow. It has been a rest
to me to hear your voices. You can expect me,
Harry, at the same hour."</p>

<p>"Is it not too much for you, Aunt Catherine? It
is everything for us that you should come."</p>

<p>"I will come," she said. "It is easier than staying
at home. Fatigue is salvation. Now I am going to
bed, to sleep. Oh, I mean it. I cannot do my work<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_242" id="Page_242">[Pg 242]</a></span>
without it. You will come too in the morning,
Hester, when I send for you? Then, good-night."</p>

<p>They watched her go away with her step still
stately. Her faithful maid, whom Mrs. John had
found so kind, but who had not always been kind, was
waiting for her. The two young people stood and
looked after her with eyes of tender respect and awe.</p>

<p>"I thought once," said Hester, in a hush of subdued
feeling, "that she might have died sitting in her
chair."</p>

<p>"Ah," said Harry, who had a little more experience,
"it is seldom that people get out of it so easily
as that. I want to tell you something more if it will
not&mdash;upset you more."</p>

<p>Hester smiled.</p>

<p>"Is there anything that can upset me more?" she
said.</p>

<p>He looked at her wistfully. He did not know
what her individual part in this trouble had been;
whether Edward was more to her than another, or
what the position was in which they stood to each
other.</p>

<p>"I don't know how to take it," he said, "or how
to understand it. There are news of&mdash;Edward."</p>

<p>The last gleam of hope shot across Hester's
mind.</p>

<p>"He is coming back?" she said, clasping her
hands.</p>

<p>Harry shook his head.</p>

<p>"Will you come with me to the door? It is such
a lovely night."</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_243" id="Page_243">[Pg 243]</a></span></p>

<p>She had not the courage or the presence of mind
to say no. She went down stairs with him, where the
lamps were lighted again, and out to the gate&mdash;the
same hour, the same atmosphere as last night. Was
it only last night that all had happened? She could
have turned and fled in the tremor, the horror of the
recollection. Just there she lay at Catherine's feet.
Just there Catherine had stood and listened.</p>

<p>Hester stood her ground like a martyr. She knew
she must learn to do so, and that it would not be
possible to avoid the place made so bitter by recollection.
Harry did not know how to speak. He
shifted uneasily from one foot to another. "He has
been traced to town; he got in at the junction, not
here. He reached London this morning, very early&mdash;with
a lady."</p>

<p>"With a lady!"</p>

<p>Hester had expected a great shock, but the
astonishment of this took its sting away.</p>

<p>"They left this afternoon, it is supposed to go
abroad," Harry said.</p>

<p>"Still with the lady? That is very strange," said
Hester, with a little quiver in her lips.</p>

<p>"There is reason now to suppose that he&mdash;married
her in the meantime."</p>

<p>Hester had grasped by accident the post of the
gate. She was glad she had done so. It was a
support to her, at least. Married her! It gave her
no immediate pain in her astonishment, which was
unspeakable. In the dusk Harry did not see her
face. He had no conception of the real state of the<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_244" id="Page_244">[Pg 244]</a></span>
case. The fact that Edward had been discovered
with another woman had confused Harry and diverted
the natural suspicions which had risen in his mind
when he had found Hester so linked with Catherine
after the discovery of Edward's flight. He watched
her with a little alarm, wondering and anxious. But
the only sign of any emotion was the tightening of
her hand upon the iron gate.</p>

<p>"You will know," he said, "whether it will be
best to say anything of this. If it will hurt her more,
let it alone till the crisis is past."</p>

<p>"If it will hurt her&mdash;more? I do not think
anything&mdash;can hurt her more."</p>

<p>"And you are nearly over-worn," he said, with a
tender and pitying cadence in his voice. "I can't
say spare yourself, Hester. You are the only one she
deserves nothing from. She ought to feel that: if
he is gone who owes her everything, yet you are
standing by her, who never owed her anything."</p>

<p>Hester could not bear it any longer. She waved
her hand to him and went in&mdash;into the house that
was not hers, where there was no one who had a
thought to bestow upon her. Where was there any
one? Her mother loved her with all her heart, but
had nothing to say to her in this rending asunder of
her being. She thought she was glad that it was all
happening in a house which was not her home, which
after, as Harry said, the crisis was past, she might
never need to enter again. She went up stairs, to
the unfamiliar room in which she had spent the
previous night. There she sat down in the dark on<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_245" id="Page_245">[Pg 245]</a></span>
the bed, and looked at it all, passing before her eyes,
like a panorama. For this was the only description
that could be given. The conversation just recorded
occurred over again, as if it had been in a book.
"With a lady!" "They left this afternoon."
"Reason to suppose that in the meantime&mdash;" And
then this talk, suspended in the air as it seemed,
came to a pause. And Hester, through the interval,
saw all her own long stormy wooing, its sudden
climax with so much that was taken for granted&mdash;"My
only love!&mdash;and I am your only love." That
was all true. Those agitated scenes, the dances that
were nothing but a love duel from beginning to end, the
snatches of talk in the midst of the music and tumult,
the one strange blessed moment in the verandah at
home, the meeting so tragical and terrible of last
night. That was a sort of interlude that faded again,
giving place to Harry's steady subdued voice&mdash;</p>

<p>"Married her in the meantime! Married her!"</p>

<p>Hester said these words aloud, with a laugh of
incredulous dismay and mockery. The sound terrified
herself when she heard it. It was Catherine's laugh
made terrible with a sort of tragic wonder. Married
her! Had there been no place for Hester at all,
nothing but delusion from beginning to end?</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_246" id="Page_246">[Pg 246]</a></span></p>




<h2><a name="CHAPTER_XIV" id="CHAPTER_XIV">CHAPTER XLIV.</a></h2>

<h3>THE SETTLEMENT.</h3>


<p>The records of the next few days were agitated
and full of excitement. Day after day Catherine
spent at the bank, immersed in calculations and consultations
with every one who could throw the
slightest light upon the matter. Everything oozed
out by degrees, and it was said now that Edward was
being hunted down by detectives, now that he had
escaped altogether, now that his defalcations were
so tremendous that nothing but absolute ruin was
possible for Vernon's, now that there was enough left
to make a fight upon if only the creditors would be
merciful, and give time, and have patience. The usual
panic with which such news is received was somehow
tempered in this case. It was thought in the
district that Catherine Vernon was enormously rich,
and independent of the bank, and when it was known
that she had not abandoned it, but in her old age
had come back, and was in the office every day,
struggling to retrieve affairs, there was nobody short
of the financial authorities of the place who did not<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_247" id="Page_247">[Pg 247]</a></span>
believe that all was safe. Catherine Vernon would
not see any harm come to the bank; Catherine
Vernon would see everybody paid. This popular faith
held up with a certainty of obstinate prepossession
which was worth so much solid capital to the tottering
house. Catherine herself placed everything she
had in the world in the common stock. She it was
who took the lead in all the discussions. She
rejected the provisions for her own comfort which
everybody concerned was anxious to make. The
prevailing feeling among all who had any power was
at first that the re-establishment of the whole concern
was hopeless, but that enough might be saved out of
the wreck to enable Catherine to end her days in
peace. To this she opposed a determined negative.
She would have no arrangement made on her behalf.
"Do you think I want," she cried, "to end my
days in peace? I am ready to die fighting, on
the contrary, rather than sacrifice the place my
father lived and died in and his father before him.
Don't speak of peace to me." It was when they
perceived that she was immovable in this point and
was determined to denude herself of everything, that
the old contemporaries who had stood by her before
in her gallant struggle, and had been her competitors,
and had lived to see themselves distanced by Catherine,
had felt it impossible to persevere in their
refusal to help. She would have no charity, she
declared with a flushed cheek. Help for Vernon's,
yes, to set them on their feet again, with a certainty
that nobody should lose a penny in the long run&mdash;for<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_248" id="Page_248">[Pg 248]</a></span>
that she would thank them with a full heart;
but help for herself, to keep her in a show of comfort
when the reality was gone, no! "not a farthing,"
she said. "I am not afraid of the workhouse," said
Catherine, with proud calm, "and I have a right to
a Vernon almshouse, the first that is vacant. Nobody
will deny that I am Redborough born, and of good
reputation. I will not take a penny. Do you think
I could not live in a single room and eat my rations
like another? It is because you don't know Catherine
Vernon yet."</p>

<p>The old men who had known Catherine Vernon
all her life could not withstand this. "We must
manage it for her, we must do it somehow," they
said. "Vernon's is an old name among us. There
is no name in all the district that the people have
such confidence in. We must try, sir, we must try,"
they began to say to each other, "to help her
through." The young men, many of them, were
impatient, and would have refused to consider the
question at all. What had an old woman to do
with business? She ought to be thankful if she
was allowed a maintenance, and to terminate her
days in comfort. But on this point there was not
another word to be said. The Grange and everything
in it was to be sold, the White House and the
old furniture, part of which Mrs. John still remembered
so fondly. There was no question as to that.
"We are prepared to sacrifice everything," Catherine
said. "What we desire is not to keep up any false
pretence, but to carry on our business and recover<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_249" id="Page_249">[Pg 249]</a></span>
ourselves by your help. Dismiss me from your mind.
I will take my chance; but think of Vernon's, which
is not hopeless, which has life in it yet." Old Mr.
Rule on his side had pages upon pages of statements
to put before the gentlemen. The week was one of
terrible suspense and misery, but at the end, though
with conditions that were very hard upon the pride
of the family, it was decided at last in favour of the
bank. Certain great capitalists came forward to
prop it up, "new blood" was put into it in the shape
of an enterprising manager, who was to guide Harry's
steps. There were bitternesses, as there is in every
cup that is administered by strangers. But Catherine
had gained her object, and she made no complaint.
Vernon's would continue, and Harry might
have it in his power still to retrieve the family
fortunes. As for all the rest, what did it matter?
She was a woman who was, or thought herself, very
independent of material conditions. Whether she
lived in the Grange or one of the Vernon almshouses,
what did it matter to her? She did not care for
fine eating or fine clothing. "Besides, my clothes
will last out my time," she said with a smile. The
week's struggle had been good for her. She had not
forgotten the great and enduring grief which lay
behind all this. But she had not had time to think
of it. She had put it away out of her mind as a
strong nature can, till her work was done. It was
waiting for her to overwhelm her: but in the
meantime she was strong.</p>

<p>Roland Ashton hurried down as soon as the<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_250" id="Page_250">[Pg 250]</a></span>
terrible news reached him. He was eager to tell
her his own connection with it, to prove to her that
it was not he who had led Edward into speculation,
that he had done his utmost to restrain him, and
had even in his anxiety been willing to embark in
what he felt to be a hazardous course in order to
save Edward from the rashness he feared. He came
down with all his details ready and a burning anxiety
to set himself right. But when he reached the scene
of all their troubles, Roland never said a word to
Catherine on the subject. Such details were beyond
the case. She had never willingly spoken of Edward;
when it was possible she ignored him altogether; the
investigations which had been set on foot, and which
had revealed the greater part of his secrets, she had
been compelled to know of, but had spoken to no
one about them. Since the first day his name had
scarcely passed her lips. Harry only had been
allowed to tell her that he had baffled all the
attempts made to find him, and had escaped. The
search after him had been indeed made rather to
satisfy anxiety than with any design of punishment,
for the other partners in the bank were responsible
for everything, and it was on their shoulders that the
burden had to fall. He disappeared as if he had
fallen into the sea or been lost in a railway accident.
The most wonderful complication of all, the companionship
in which he had left England, was not
told to her then. It threw to all the others a
horrible mockery upon the whole story. There was
a bitter sort of smile upon Roland's face when he sat<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_251" id="Page_251">[Pg 251]</a></span>
with the old people, and told them all the investigations
he had made, the incredulous indignation with
which he had received the first idea that Emma's
disappearance could be connected with that of
Edward, the growing certainty that it was so, and
finally the receipt of her letter which he brought
them to read. The old people were very sad for
their beloved Catherine and little inclined to laugh,
but the old captain indulged in a tremulous roar
which was half a groan, and the old lady, who
allowed that her sense of humour was small, gave a
grieved smile when it was read to her. This is
what Emma said:&mdash;</p>

<blockquote>

<p>"<span class="smcap">Dear Roland</span>,&mdash;I think it my duty to let you
know, as it was, so to speak, in your house I was
living at the time, how it is that I had to make up
my mind at a very short notice, and couldn't even
go through the form of referring Edward to you. I
met him in the train, as you will probably have
heard. I was rather sorry about leaving Redborough,
and so was he too till he saw me beside him. And
then it turned out that he had been very much
struck with me at Ellen Merridew's parties, and
would have spoken then but for some entanglements
that were of old standing, and that he could not
shake off. I need not mention any names, but if I
say it was some one that was quite out of the question,
some one that was detested at the Grange, you
will know. He told me he was leaving England for
ever, and would I come with him? You know I<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_252" id="Page_252">[Pg 252]</a></span>
have always thought it my first duty to get settled,
being the youngest and without any fixed home.
So after thinking it over for an hour or two, and him
being so anxious to come to the point, which is
generally just where gentlemen are so slow, I thought
it best to consent. We were married before a registrar,
but he says that is just as legal as in church.
It was at the registrar's in Holywood Street, Trentham
Square. We are going to travel, and may be
moving about for a good while; but when we settle
I shall let you know. I am glad to tell you that we
shall be quite well off, and have everything very
handsome; and Edward never grudges me anything
I fancy. Give my love to them all, and let them
know I am as happy as possible, and that I am Mrs.
Edward Vernon now, which is one of the prettiest
names I know.</p>

<p class="quotsig">
Your affectionate sister,<br />
"<span class="smcap">Emma.</span>"
</p>
</blockquote>

<p>This was the last that was heard of this strange
pair for a number of years. They discovered that
Edward, after many losses, had made a sudden successful
venture which had brought him a sum so
large as to turn his head. He had been utterly
demoralised by all the excitements he had passed
through, and the sense of a reckoning which he could
never meet, and he had not given himself time to
think. He disappeared into the unknown with his
ill-gotten gains and the wife he had picked up in the
midnight train, and was seen no more. As for poor
Algernon Merridew, who was his victim, although<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_253" id="Page_253">[Pg 253]</a></span>
only as his own eagerness and that of his wife to get
money anyhow, made him so, he had to descend, like
all the rest, from his temporary grandeur and gaiety.
Old Merridew was as stern now as he had been indulgent
before, and Ellen, who had been almost
worshipped as one of the Vernons when she glorified
the family by entering it, was now the object of
everybody's scoffs and accusations. But Ellen was
a girl of spirit, and equal to the circumstances.
Algernon got a humble place in the bank, and the
little family lived with Harry, putting their small
means together until better days came; but adversity
and a determination at least not to let herself be
insignificant had so inspiring an effect upon Ellen,
that she kept the impoverished household as gay as
the extravagant one had been, by cheaper and better
means. The Merridew girls, once so subservient,
learned what she called "their place" when she was
poor more effectually than they had done when she
was rich. And her brother, always by her, who,
though he had losses, was still the chief partner in
the bank, Catherine Vernon's nephew, and the bearer
of a name which commanded respect in all the
district, kept the balance even. When Vernon's
flourished again Algernon became a partner, and
all the past grandeurs of the beginning were more
than realised.</p>

<p>In the meantime, however, when it had just been
decided that Vernon's, bolstered up by a great deal
of supplementary aid, was to go on again, there was
much commotion among all the dependents of the<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_254" id="Page_254">[Pg 254]</a></span>
house. For one thing it was decided that as the
Grange was to be sold, the most natural refuge for
Catherine was at the Vernonry, her own house, from
which some of her dependents must go to make room
for her. This was the one point upon which she had
made no personal decision, for it hurt her pride to be
obliged to dismiss one of those for whom she had
provided shelter so long. There had been a great
effort made to make her retain the Grange, and continue
her life in its usual course, a little retrenched
and pared away, yet without any great disturbance
of the habitual use and wont. This she would not
consent to, making the protest we have seen, that
external circumstances were nothing to her, that one
of the Vernon almshouses would be as good a shelter
as any other for an old woman. But she shrank
from bidding any one of her pensioners to make
room for her in the Vernonry. It raised a wonderful
commotion, as may be supposed, in the house itself.
All the dwellers on the garden side were disposed to
think that Mrs. Reginald, whose boys were now
growing up, and two of them in what their mother
called "positions," was the right person to go. But
Mrs. Reginald herself was of opinion that her house,
a good deal battered and knocked about by the boys
in the course of their bringing up, was not in a fit
state to receive Catherine Vernon, and that the
other side, which was the best, was the natural
place for her. The Miss Vernon-Ridgways could
think or speak of nothing else.</p>

<p>"Our little place," they said, "is far too small for<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_255" id="Page_255">[Pg 255]</a></span>
Catherine. She could not turn round in it. Of
course we would turn out in a moment; it would be
our duty. But dear Catherine, used to such large
rooms, what could she do in ours, which is the size
of a pocket-handkerchief? And if Mrs. Reginald
will not budge, why there is Mrs. John. She is so
intimate with Catherine nowadays. Hester, that
used to be such a rebel, and whom Catherine, we
all know, could not endure, is always there. Dear
me, of course there cannot be a doubt about it.
Mrs. John's house is the right thing; she must have
that," which was a great relief to their minds.</p>

<p>Mr. Mildmay Vernon made a great many faces
over his newspaper as he sat in the summer-house.
He reflected that the hot water-pipes would be sure
to get out of order in winter, and who would now
repair them? He did not commit himself by any
remark, but he thought the more. When Mrs. John
told him of the opinion of the sisters, and consulted
him with a troubled countenance, he only shook
his head.</p>

<p>"I am sure I would do anything for Catherine,"
Mrs. John said, "especially now when she is in
trouble; but we cannot go far from here, for Hester
is so much with her; and where are we to get a
house? There is nothing within reach but that
little cottage on the road. I am sure, if I were Mrs.
Reginald, with no particular tie, and her boys in
town, such a long way to come, I don't think I
should have any doubt as to what my duty was."</p>

<p>It was a question which Hester at last solved in<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_256" id="Page_256">[Pg 256]</a></span>
her hasty way, declaring that wherever they lived
Catherine must have the best place in her own
house&mdash;a principle to which her mother was obliged
to make a faltering adhesion. But while every one
was thus resisting, Mr. Mildmay Vernon was carrying
on his reflections about the hot water-pipes.</p>

<p>"She put me next the trees on account of my
rheumatism," he said to himself. "I know she did,
and I shall never live through a winter if the apparatus
gets out of gear. And I can't afford to pay
for the fire, that's clear." The result of which reflection
was that Mr. Mildmay Vernon made it
known that he had received a legacy which would
make a little addition to his income, and he could
not think any longer of taking up room which he
believed was wanted. "Besides, one may accept a
favour from one's cousin," he said, "especially when
it is not much of a favour, being the damp part of
the house which few people would have taken had
they been paid for doing so&mdash;but to be indebted to
a firm of bankrupts is impossible," Mr. Mildmay
Vernon said.</p>

<p>He took his departure in the beginning of the
winter, just when the want of the hot water-pipes
would be beginning to make itself felt. And it was
almost without consulting her mother that Hester
made arrangements for removing their few household
goods into his house, to leave their own free
for the mistress of all. Mrs. John consented to the
arrangement, but not without a few tears.</p>

<p>"It is not that I mind the difference," she said,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_257" id="Page_257">[Pg 257]</a></span>
"in the size of the rooms, or anything of that sort.
But it feels like coming down in the world."</p>

<p>"We have all come down in the world," said
Hester; "and Catherine most of all."</p>

<p>And then Mrs. John cried for Catherine, as she
had first done for herself, and resisted no more.</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_258" id="Page_258">[Pg 258]</a></span></p>




<h2><a name="CHAPTER_XV" id="CHAPTER_XV">CHAPTER XLV.</a></h2>

<h3>THE END.</h3>


<p>It was early in November when the time came for
Catherine to leave the Grange. She had made a
selection of a very few things to go with her, and all
the others had been valued for the sale. She spoke
quite cheerfully about the sale. She had gathered a
great many valuable things about her, and it was
thought they would sell very well. She had some
pictures which had been in the house for generations,
and some things which her great-uncle had picked
up when he made the <i>grand tour</i>. And there was a
great deal of valuable china and quantities of old
silver, the accumulations of a family that had not
been disturbed for generations. She showed no feeling
about it, people said; and indeed Catherine felt
that neither about this nor any other external thing
was she capable of showing much feeling. She cared
nothing about leaving the Grange. Had she been
actually brought down as far as the almshouse, in all
likelihood she would have taken it with the proudest<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_259" id="Page_259">[Pg 259]</a></span>
placidity. What was there in that to move a soul?
One room was very much like another if you went
to general principles, though it might be larger or
smaller. Were these matters to make one's self
unhappy about? So she said, fully meaning it, and
with a smile. She was at the office every day. It
seemed a matter almost of economy to keep for the
present the brougham with its one horse which took
her there; but of everything else she divested herself
with the frankest good will. To the outer world
she kept her good looks, though she was thinner,
and her complexion paled; but those who watched
her more closely found that there were many changes
in Catherine. "I'm killed, sire," old Captain Morgan
still said. He himself had given them a great
alarm; he had had "a stroke" in the beginning of the
winter, but it had passed away, though he still said
everything was too far for him, and found his evening
hobble to the Grange too much. He went as
often as he could, sometimes to bring Hester home,
who was always there to receive Catherine at her
return, sometimes only to sit and talk for an hour
in the evening. With other people when they
came, Catherine employed the same plan which she
had first set on foot with Harry. She made Hester
her representative in the conversation. She said it
did her good, while she rested, to hear the voices
and to take into her mind now and then a scrap
of the conversation. But it seemed to Hester that
she paid less and less attention to what people said.
She was very cheerful in her time of business, but<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_260" id="Page_260">[Pg 260]</a></span>
when she lay back in her chair in the evenings, she
was so still sometimes that but for her hand now
and then stealing to her eyes, her anxious companion
would scarcely have known that she lived. She
thought nothing of her health for her own part, and
constantly said that she was quite well and that her
work agreed with her. There had been a little excitement
in her appearance when she came home in
the evening of the last day she was to spend at the
Grange. Hester thought it was the coming change
that occasioned this, though Catherine declared her
indifference to it. She talked with a little haste
and excitement during dinner, and when they were
alone afterwards did not flag as was her wont, but
continued the talk. "It is a great pity," she said,
"a girl like you, that instead of teaching or doing
needlework, you should not go to Vernon's, as you
have a right to do, and work there."</p>

<p>"I wish I could," Hester said, with eager eyes.</p>

<p>"They tell me you wanted to do something like
what I had done. Ah! you did not know it was
all to be done over again. This life is full of repetitions.
People think the same thing does not
happen to you twice over, but it does in my experience.
You would soon learn. A few years'
work, and you would be an excellent man of business;
but it can't be."</p>

<p>"Why cannot it be? You did it. I should not
be afraid&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"I was old. I was past my youth. All that sort
of thing was over for me. It could be in one<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_261" id="Page_261">[Pg 261]</a></span>
way&mdash;if you could make up your mind to marry
Harry&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"I could not&mdash;I could not! I will never marry."</p>

<p>"It is a great pity you cannot&mdash;I think it is
a mistake. I have done him a great deal of
injustice in my time; but one finds out sooner or
later that brains are not everything. There is
another man, and he has brains, who would marry
you if you would have him, Hester&mdash;Roland Ashton.
Take him&mdash;it is better in the end."</p>

<p>"Oh, do not ask me! I will never marry," Hester
cried.</p>

<p>Then Catherine suddenly sat upright in her chair,
and clasped her hands together with almost wild
emphasis. "I would marry," she cried, "if I were
you! I would wipe out every recollection. Did they
tell you the pitiful story of a meeting in the train, a
marriage suddenly made up&mdash;and who it was that
went away into the darkness in what was to have
been your place?"</p>

<p>"Yes, they have told me," said Hester, in a low
voice.</p>

<p>"Lord in Heaven!" cried Catherine, "what a
world, what a world this is!&mdash;all mockery and delusion,
all farce except when it is tragic. And after
that you will not marry&mdash;for the sake of&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"How can I help it?" cried the girl, with wistful
eyes. "You do the same yourself."</p>

<p>"Myself? that is different. Your heart will not
be empty for ever, Hester. It cannot close itself up
for ever. With me that was the last;&mdash;this is one<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_262" id="Page_262">[Pg 262]</a></span>
thing that makes a mother like no one else. Hold
the last fast, they say. It was everything one had to
look to. I am very cheerful, and I shall live for
years&mdash;many people do. But I have got my death
blow," Catherine said. Then the silence dropped
again between them. It was before a cheerful fire,
with a lamp burning&mdash;altogether a more cheerful
scene than in those sad summer days.</p>

<p>"There are some people who would not take much
interest in it," Catherine continued, "but you do. I
think you are like me, Hester. We were kept apart
by circumstances; perhaps it is possible we might
have been kept apart on purpose. "He"&mdash;Catherine
made a pause before and after, and said the word
with a sob&mdash;"never understood me. They say he
was&mdash;afraid of me, never could trust me with what
he really wished. Alas, alas! It must have been
my fault&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Oh no, no!"</p>

<p>"Ah, yes, yes. I had rather think that; and there
is a great deal that is base in me. I could not but
laugh even at that story of Emma&mdash;even now.
Human nature is so strange&mdash;it is a farce. I am not
angry though, not at all: all things seem floating off
from me. I could think we were floating away
altogether, you and I&mdash;&mdash;"</p>

<p>"You are not well. You are doing too much. I
should like to send for the doctor."</p>

<p>"I believe in no doctors. No, no; I am quite
well, only tired with the day's work and ready for
rest."</p>

<hr class="chap" />

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_263" id="Page_263">[Pg 263]</a></span></p>

<p>And the silence resumed its sway. She laid
herself back as before&mdash;her pale head against the
dark curtains stood out like ivory. Some time
afterwards she sighed two or three times heavily,
then there was no sound at all. The fire burned
cheerfully, the lamp shed its steady glow upon
Hester's book, to which after this talk she did not,
as may be supposed, pay very much attention. But
Catherine did not like a vacant watcher, and the
book was a kind of safeguard, protecting her from
the sense of an eye upon her. Perhaps an hour
passed so. A chill crept into the room like nothing
Hester had ever felt before, though all was still,
serenely warm and bright to outward appearance.
She rose softly at last and touched Catherine's
hands, that were folded in her lap, to wake her. It
was from them the cold had come that had crept
to her heart.</p>

<p>There was, then, no need that Catherine Vernon
should ever live in cramped rooms, in another house
from that in which she had been born. When they
carried her out from it a week after, the whole population
came out to meet the procession, and followed
her weeping, lining the path, filling the streets.
Her misfortunes, and the noble courage with which
she had stood up against them at the end, brought
back all the fulness of the love and honour with
which she had been regarded when she first became
supreme in the place, and all bounty flowed from her.
There was not any one connected with her, high or
low, not only the poor Vernons who had snarled and<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_264" id="Page_264">[Pg 264]</a></span>
scoffed while they accepted her favours, but the
very men of money who had of late taken upon
themselves the air of patronising Catherine, but was
proud to be able to repeat now, on the day of her
burying, what she had said to them, and how they
had come in contact with her. The doctors were not
clear as to how she died. She had never been suspected
of heart disease, or any other disease. But it
was her heart somehow, with or without a medical
reason for it, that had failed her. The last touch,
those who loved her thought, had been too much.
Derision such as she had delighted in in other
circumstances, had overtaken the last tragic occurrence
of her life. Catherine had not been able to
bear the grim mockery, the light of a farce upon
that tragedy of her own.</p>

<p>And as for Hester, all that can be said for her is
that there are two men whom she may choose
between, and marry either if she pleases&mdash;good men
both, who will never wring her heart. Old Mrs.
Morgan desires one match, Mrs. John another.
What can a young woman desire more than to have
such a possibility of choice?</p>
