<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXVIII: Was It Love?</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-28" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Was It Love?</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Was he in love? That this was a question very interesting to Hester there can be no reason to conceal. She did not even conceal it from herself, nor did she trifle with herself by pretending to suppose that if he were in love it could be with anyone else. There was no one else who had ever appeared to attract him. To nobody had he so much as given his passing attention. When he had neglected her at the Grange it had been truly, as he said, for no higher reason than that he might hand down the old ladies to supper or tea. No young one had ever been suggested as having any attraction for him. Hester did her best to enter calmly into this question. It is one which it is sometimes very difficult for a young woman to decide upon. What is conspicuous and apparent to others will often remain to her a question full of doubt and uncertainty; and it is to be feared that when this is the case it is all the more likely that her own sentiments will be capable of very little question. This, however, was not exactly the case with Hester. Her mind was very much interested, and indeed excited. She wanted to know what Edward meant. From the first morning when he had met her, a child wandering on the Common, his manner had been different to her from the manner of other people, or from his own manner to others. His eyes had lingered upon her with pleasure even when his look had been stealthy; even when it had been but a glance in passing, they had said things to her which no other eyes said. His interest in her had never failed. It had not leaped like Harry’s, after a good deal of indifference, into a sudden outburst. The very charm and attraction of it had lain in the restraint which Hester had often considered to be dishonest, and against which she had chafed. She had known all through, even in those evenings when he had neglected her, that he was always conscious what she was doing, and knew without looking when anyone went to talk to her, when she left the room and when she came back. This had kept her own interest in him unvarying. But Hester was not any more sure of her own sentiments than of his. She remembered with some shame that Roland Ashton’s presence had made a great difference in the state of her mind as regarded Edward. She had felt but little curiosity about him when that stranger was at the Vernonry. All the foreground of her mind had been so pleasantly occupied by that new figure which was in itself much more attractive than Edward, that he had slid almost completely out of her thoughts. And this fact, which was only quite apparent to her after Roland was gone, had greatly discomfited Hester, and given her a very small opinion of herself. Was it possible that any new object that might appear would have the same effect upon her? The effect had passed away and Edward had come slowly back to his original position as the person who in all Redborough interested her most. But the incident had been of a very disturbing character, and had altogether confused her ideas. Therefore the question was one of a very special interest. To know exactly how he regarded her would much help her in deciding the other question, not less important, which was, how she regarded him? Everything thus depended, Hester felt, on Edward’s sentiments. If it should turn out that he loved her⁠—strange thought which made her heart beat!⁠—it could not be but that in great and tender gratitude for such a gift she should love him. She did feel offended by his efforts to disguise his feelings, or even to get the better of them⁠—never at least when she was cool and in command of her judgment; but there could be no doubt that she was very curious and anxious to know.</p>
			<p>Was he in love? The appearances which had made the lookers-on say so were not altogether to be attributed to this, Hester knew. His paleness, his excitement, his absence of mind, had all been from another cause. The discovery had startled her much, and given her an uneasy sense that she might at other times have referred to some cause connected with herself manifestations of feeling which had nothing to do with her, which belonged to an entirely different order of sentiments⁠—a thought which made her blush red with shame, since there is nothing that hurts a girl’s pride so much as the suggestion, that she has been vain, and imagined, like the foolish women, a man to love her who perhaps has never thought of her at all. But the question altogether was one which was too profound for Hester. She could not tell what to make of it. Among the heads of the young party at the Merridews, she was aware that no doubt was entertained on the matter. Edward was allotted to her by a sort of unspoken right, and in Ellen’s jibes and Harry’s gloom she read alike the same distinct understanding. Ellen in her chatter, notwithstanding the warning to her cousin at the beginning, accepted it entirely as a matter of course: and in a hundred things that Edward had said as well as in his looks, which were still more eloquent, there had been strong confirmation of the general belief. But yet⁠—Hester could not make up her mind that it was beyond doubt. She watched him, not with anxiety so much as with a great curiosity. If it was not so, would she be deeply disappointed? she asked herself without being able even to answer that question. And as to her own sentiments, they were quite as perplexing. She was half ashamed to feel that they depended upon his. Was this a confession of feminine inferiority? she sometimes wondered with a hot blush⁠—the position here being very perplexing indeed and profoundly difficult to elucidate; for it neither consisted with the girl’s dignity to give her love unsought, nor thus to wait as if ready to deliver up her affections to the first bidder.</p>
			<p>Such a matter of thought, involving the greatest interests of life, is curiously mixed up with its most frivolous events. They met in the midst of the dancing with a constant crash and accompaniment of dance-music, amid chatterings and laughter, and all the inane nothings of a ballroom, and yet in the midst of this were to consider and decide the most important question of their lives. It was only thus, except by concerted meetings which would have solved the question, that they could meet at all, and the grotesque incongruity of such surroundings with the matter in the foreground, sometimes affected Hester with a sort of moral sickness and disgust. The scene seemed to throw a certain unworthiness, levity, unelevated aspect upon the question altogether⁠—as if this thing which was to affect two lives was no more than an engagement for a dance.</p>
			<p>And though it is a strange thing to say, it is doubtful whether Edward was much more decided in his sentiments than Hester was. In such a case the man at least generally knows more or less what he wants; but partly because Edward’s mind was in a high state of excitement on other subjects, he too was for a moment entirely uncertain as to what his wishes were. He knew with sufficient distinctness that he could not tolerate the idea of her appropriation by anyone else, and it was his full intention that some time or other Hester should be his, and no one else’s, which gave a foundation of certainty to his thoughts which was wanting to hers. But further than this, he too was in a chaos somewhat similar to that of Hester. Sometimes there was in his mind the strongest impulse to tell her that he loved her, and to settle the matter by an engagement, which must, however, he felt, be a secret one, giving satisfaction to themselves but no one else. And here it may be remarked that whereas Hester was apt to be seized by sudden fits of shame at the idea that perhaps, after all her thoughts on the subject, he was not thinking of her at all, Edward on the other hand felt no such alarm, and never thought it even presumptuous on his part to assume the certainty of her love for him, which, as the reader knows, was a certainty to which she had not herself attained. He believed with simplicity that when, if ever (nay, certainly it was to happen some time), he declared himself, Hester would respond at once. He acknowledged to himself that it was possible that in pique, or impatience, or weariness, if he did not keep a vigilant watch over the situation, it might happen that Hester would accept someone else. Her mother might drive her to it, or the impossibility of going on longer might drive her to it; but he had so much confidence in the simplicity of her nature that he did not believe that the complications which held him in on every side could affect her, and was sure that in her heart the question was solved in the most primitive way.</p>
			<p>This was and generally is the great difference between the man and woman in such a controversy; until he had spoken, it was a shame to her that she should ask herself did he intend to speak; but Edward felt no shame if ever the idea crossed his mind that he might be mistaken in supposing she loved him; such a discovery would have made him furious. He would have aimed all sorts of ill names, such as coquette and jilt, at her; but he had no fear of any such mistake. He felt sure that he had her in his power, and when he did declare himself would be received with enthusiasm; and he always meant to declare himself some time, to reward her long suspense, and to make her the happiest of women. In words, this part is generally allotted to the lady, as it was in the days of chivalry. But the nineteenth century has modified many things, and if ever (out of America) it was really the woman who occupied the more commanding position, it is no longer so in the apprehension of the world. Only in this particular case, as has been seen, Edward was wrong. It is possible enough that in the curious position of affairs between them she would have followed his lead whatever it might be; but even this was by no means certain, and as a matter of fact, though her curiosity about him drew her mind after him, she had not even gone so far as he had, nor come to any ultimate certainty on the case at all.</p>
			<p>Emma Ashton, who by means of propinquity⁠—that quick knitter of bonds⁠—had become Hester’s frequent companion, had very different ideas on a similar subject. There was no sort of indefiniteness in her views. She was perfectly clear as to what she was likely to do in a given case, and the case in question occupied probably almost as great a share in her thoughts as the different yet similar question which agitated the mind of Hester. It was indeed to outward view, though with so many and subtle differences, a very similar question. Emma’s wonder was whether Reginald Merridew would “speak” before she went away. She had no doubt that all the requisite sentiments were existing, and she had satisfied herself that when he did “speak” there was no reason why she should not reply favourably. The family was “quite respectable,” it might almost be said also that it was “quite well off,” but that there were rumours that Algernon was to be “made an eldest son of,” which were somewhat disquieting. The suggestion was one which made Emma indignant, notwithstanding the gratitude she owed Algernon and his wife for giving her “her chance” in Redborough.</p>
			<p>“When there is an estate I suppose it is all right,” Emma said; “anyhow it can’t be helped when that’s the case; and there must be an eldest son. But when your property is in money it does seem such a mistake to make a difference between your children. Don’t you think so? Oh, but I do; they are just one as good as another, and why should one be rich and another poor? If old <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Merridew does anything of this sort I am sure I shall always think it is very unfair.”</p>
			<p>“I suppose <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Merridew has a right to do what he pleases?” said Hester; “and as it does not matter to us⁠—”</p>
			<p>“You speak a great deal too fast,” said Emma, offended. “Say it doesn’t matter to you: but it may to me a great deal, and therefore I take a great interest in it. Do you think parents have a right to do what they please? If they make us come into the world, whether we wish it or not, of course they are bound to do their best for us. I am the youngest myself, and I hope I know my place; but then there was no money at all among us. Papa spent it all himself; so certainly we had share and share alike, for there was nothing. When that’s the case nobody can have a word to say. But the Merridews have a good deal, and everyone ought to have his just share. Not but what I like Algernon Merridew very much. He is always very agreeable, and I think it very nice both of Ellen and him that they should have been so kind to me and given me my chance, though you say we’re no relations. I am sure I always thought we were relations, for my part.”</p>
			<p>“Did you think Reginald was your relation too?”</p>
			<p>“Well, not perhaps quite so far as that⁠—a connection I should have said; but it does not matter very much now,” Emma said, with a little simper of satisfaction. “What a good thing Roland found out about grandpapa and grandmamma, Hester⁠—and how fortunate that they should have asked <em>me</em>! If everything goes right I shall feel that I owe the happiness of my life to it. When a girl goes out upon a visit, she never knows what may happen before she gets home⁠—or even she may never need to go home at all. I don’t know if I shall, I am sure. To talk about anything taking place from Roland’s house would be absurd. Why, we don’t even know the clergyman! and nobody cares a bit about us. If there was any meaning in home it should be from Elinor’s, you know⁠—for everybody knows us there.”</p>
			<p>“What do you mean about ‘anything taking place’?⁠—and from⁠—from what?” Hester asked, who never paid too much attention to Emma’s monologues, and had altogether lost the thread of her discoursings now.</p>
			<p>“Oh,” cried Emma, clasping Hester’s arm close, “how you do make one blush! Of course you know very well what I mean. If he speaks before I go away⁠—and I am sure I hope he will, for it would be such a nuisance to have him following me up to Kilburn!⁠—I don’t suppose there would be any occasion for waiting long. Why should people wait when they are well off enough, and nothing to be gained by it? When the man has not got settled in a proper situation, or when there is not enough to live upon, then of course they must put it off; but in such a case as ours⁠—I mean this, you know⁠—it might as well be here as anywhere,” Emma said, reflectively. “Cousin Catherine has always been very kind to me. Rather than let grandpapa and grandmamma be disturbed at their age, I shouldn’t wonder if she would give the breakfast⁠—especially considering the double connection, and that it is such a very good thing to get me settled. You needn’t laugh, Hester. It is not a thing to laugh at. Unless I had settled, what should I have done? You are an only daughter, you don’t know what it is to be the youngest and have no proper home.”</p>
			<p>These words mollified Hester, who had been in lofty opposition, half disgusted, half indignant. She was brought down by this appeal to her sympathy. “But you are happy with your brother?” she said.</p>
			<p>“Oh, yes⁠—happy enough; Roland is very kind. And though it’s a small house, it is tolerably nice, and two maids with nothing particular to do. But it is very dull, you know, and I don’t know many people. And you must always take into consideration that at any moment Roland might marry, and then where should I be? Why, he admires you very much. He might just as likely as not, next time he comes, make you an offer; and then where should I be?”</p>
			<p>“You think, I suppose,” said Hester, loftily, “that when a man makes an offer, as you say, that is all about it; there is no opposition to be looked for on the girl’s side?”</p>
			<p>“Well, you know,” said Emma, “I call you one of the high-flown ones. There are always some like that. But in an ordinary way what do girls want but their chance? And when they’ve got it, what folly to refuse⁠—at least in my position, Hester. If I don’t get settled, what have I to look forward to? Roland will marry sooner or later. He’s an awful flirt, and though he admires you very much, I shouldn’t advise you to have anything to do with him unless you just marry him out and out. I should think he’d make a good husband. But don’t be engaged to him, Hester; mind my words. Be married in three weeks, or have nothing to say to him⁠—that is my advice. Oh, you need not be huffy. I am sure I don’t want you or anyone to marry him, at least till I am settled. But if I don’t settle now, he is sure, of course, to marry some time; and then where shall I be? This is what makes me wish that if⁠—<em>he</em>, you know, is going to speak, he would do it, and not shilly-shally. It is astonishing how men shilly-shally. I think they take a pleasure in it. They would know better if they had to wait as we have, and wonder, and feel that we can’t make any arrangements or settle anything till we know what’s coming. If I have to go away and he never says anything, I don’t know what I shall do.”</p>
			<p>“Is this because you⁠—care so much for Reginald Merridew?” Hester could not so form her lips as to say love.</p>
			<p>Emma made a sort of reflective pause. “I like him well enough,” she said. “I am not one to go on about love and so forth. Besides, that sort of thing is not becoming in a girl. You can’t, till you are quite certain what <em>they</em> mean, don’t you know? It is dreadful to go caring for them, and all that, and then to find out that they don’t care for you. A girl has to wait till they speak.”</p>
			<p>Hester listened not with her usual mixture of amusement and indignation, but with a curious feeling of shame and alarm growing in her. Was not this what she herself was doing? Emma’s desire that her supposed lover should speak and settle the question, was it not much the same thing as her own curiosity and self-questioning in respect to Edward? Emma was always more practical. She was so in sentimental matters as well as in everything else. Things that other people leave indistinct, in a half light, she put clearly, without any pretences at obscurity. Her grieved sense of the shilly-shallying of men, her consciousness of all the inconveniences that arose from their way of putting off their explanations, her prudential conviction that a girl should not commit herself by “caring for” <em>them</em>, before they made it apparent that they cared for her⁠—were these not so many vulgar, straightforward statements of the dilemma in which Hester too found herself? But this grotesque resemblance of sentiment and situation made Hester, as may be supposed, passionately angry and indignant, not with Emma, who was guiltless, and who pursued the subject endlessly, never tiring of it, nor of going over the matter again and again from the beginning as they walked, but with herself and Edward, and fate, which had placed her in such circumstances. It was something like a caricature of herself that was thus presented to her, and she could scarcely help laughing at it, even while she resented it warmly as an insult offered to her by⁠—whom? not Emma⁠—by circumstances and evil fortune, and the spite of a position which was intolerable, and Catherine Vernon. All these persons were conspiring against her, but none of them were so hard upon Hester as this little purring deliberate Emma, holding up her little distorted mirror that Hester in her pride might see how like was the image in it to her own troubled face.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
