<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXII: Dancing Teas</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-22" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Dancing Teas</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>It was shortly after the departure of Roland that a new era dawned for Hester in social life. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Algernon Merridew had felt from the moment of her return from Abroad that there was a work for her to do in Redborough. It was not the same as in her maiden days, when she had been at the head of Harry’s household, wonderfully enfranchised indeed, but still somewhat under the awe of Aunt Catherine. But now she was altogether independent, and nobody had any right to make suggestions as to who she should invite or how she should entertain, to a married lady, with an admiring husband, not to speak of brother⁠—and sisters-in-law, eagerly anticipating social elevation by her means, at her back. Ellen was not ill-natured. She was very willing to promote the happiness and prosperity of others, so long as she could do so without any diminution of her own⁠—a negative goodness which the world at large is very well pleased to acknowledge as satisfactory. And it is not at all probable that the representations of Harry, or the good-humoured suggestions of Algernon inspired by Harry, to the effect that it would be sublimely good of her to take up and brighten the life of Hester, would have come to very much, had it not at the same time occurred to Ellen that Hester was the best assistant she could have on her own side of the house, in the indispensable work of making her Thursdays “go.” Rather than that they should not “go,” she would have embraced her worst enemy, had she possessed one; and she did not care to rely upon the Merridew girls, feeling as she did that she had condescended in entering their family, and that they must never be allowed to forget that they owed everything to her, and she nothing to them. But at the same time she required a feminine auxiliary, a somebody to be her right hand, and help to make everything “go.” The result of her cogitations on this subject was that she set out for the Vernonry one afternoon in the little victoria, which Algernon, rather tremulous about the cost, had set up for her, and which, with the smart coachman who for the moment condescended to be gardener too, and the boy on the box who was of quite a fashionable size, looked a very imposing little equipage. Ellen lay back in her little carriage enveloped in her new sealskin, with a little hat of the same upon her head, and a muff also of the same, and her light hair looking all the brighter against that dark background, with bracelets enough to make a jingle wherever she went, and which she had to push up upon her arm from time to time, and a violet scent about herself and all her garments, at least the scent which is called violet at Piesse and Lubin’s, which served her purpose. When she drove up in this state, it may be supposed what a flutter she made in the afternoon atmosphere. The inmates of the Vernonry rushed to their windows.</p>
			<p>“It is that little doll Ellen, come to show off more of her finery,” said one sister.</p>
			<p>“I wonder why she comes here, when you set her down so, Matilda,” said the other.</p>
			<p>They kept behind the curtains, one over the other’s shoulder, that she might not see how curious they were. But when Ellen floated in at the verandah door, and was evidently gone to see <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John, their astonishment was boundless. They shrugged their shoulders and interchanged glances with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mildmay Vernon, who, with his newspaper in his hand, had appeared at his window.</p>
			<p>“Did he think she was going to see <em>him</em>?” Miss Matilda said, even while addressing these satires in pantomime to him. “What interest can he take in Ellen? It is just prying and curiosity, and nothing more.”</p>
			<p>The gentleman’s comments were not more friendly. He chuckled as he saw where Ellen was going.</p>
			<p>“The old cats will think it a visit to them, and they will be disappointed,” he said to himself, all the same shrugging his shoulders back again to Miss Matilda. They kept on the watch all the time the visit lasted, and it was a long one. The sisters discussed the victoria, the horse, the little footman, the great fur rug which Ellen threw off as she jumped lightly out of the carriage. It was somewhat hard indeed that a little minx like Ellen should have all these things, and her seniors, her betters, who would have enjoyed them so much, none of them. But so it always is in this unjust world.</p>
			<p>On the other side of the partition from where the sisters were sitting, Ellen’s appearance had caused an almost equal sensation. She was not looked for, and the proposal she made was a very startling one.</p>
			<p>“I am going to begin my Thés Dansantes, and I want you to help me,” she said abruptly. “I want you to be my right hand; just like my sister. You know I can’t do everything myself. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John, you shall come too, I never intended to leave you out; but I want Hester to help me, for she is the only one that can help me. She is really my cousin. Clara and Connie are only my sisters-in-law, and I don’t care to have them about me in that position. It would be nice for me, and it would be giving Hester the best of chances. Now, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John, I am sure you will see it in that light. What could be better for a girl? All that she will meet will be the best sort of people: and she would have her chance.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know what you mean by having my chance⁠—and I don’t want any chance,” said Hester, in a flush of shame and indignation; but Ellen put her down with a wave of her gloved hand and arm, all tinkling with bangles.</p>
			<p>“Of course you don’t know anything about it,” she said, “an unmarried girl! We don’t want you to know. Your mother and I will talk about that; but you can understand that a nice dance in a nice house like ours will be something pleasant. And you would be there not just like a visitor, but like one of the family, and get a good deal of attention, and as many partners as ever you liked.”</p>
			<p>“Of course, Ellen, of course,” cried <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John. “I am sure <em>I</em> understand you. It would be very nice for Hester. At her age every girl likes a little gaiety, and in my position I have never been able to give it to her. It was very different when my husband was alive, when we were in the White House. I am sure I have never grudged it to you, but it made a great difference. I was not brought up to this sort of thing. I had my balls, and my parties, as many as could be wished, when I was Hester’s age. If her poor papa had lived, and we had stayed in the White House, she would have held a very different position. It gives me a little prick, you will understand, to think of Hester wanting anybody to be kind to her; but still, as it is so, and as you are her relation, I never could object. You will find no objection from me.”</p>
			<p>“No, I should think not,” cried Ellen, throwing back her warm coat. It was at the time when sealskins were rare, when they were just “coming in,” and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John looked at it with admiration. She did not ask, as the Miss Vernon-Ridgways did, why this little minx should have everything; but she remembered with a little regret the days when she too had everything that a young woman could desire, and wondered, with a little flutter at her heart, whether when Hester married she would have a sealskin and a victoria, and all the other crowns of happiness. She looked with something of a pathetic look at her daughter. Ah! if she could but see Hester as Ellen was!</p>
			<p>Meanwhile Hester was elevating her young head as was natural, in special scorn of the “chance” which her cousin meant to secure for her, and in defiance altogether of the scheme, which nevertheless (for she was but human and nineteen, and the prospect of a dance every week took away her breath) moved her in spite of herself.</p>
			<p>“When I was a child,” Hester said, “when you first came to see us, Cousin Ellen, you said you must see a great deal of me, that I must go to your house, that you and Harry would take me out, that I should have a share in your pleasures. Perhaps my mother and you don’t remember⁠—but I do. How I used to look out for you every morning; how I used to watch at the window, thinking they will surely come or send, or take some notice today. I was very young, you know, and believed everything, and wished so much to drive about and to go to parties. But you never came.”</p>
			<p>“To think she should remember all that!” cried Ellen, a little abashed. “Of course I didn’t. Why, you were only a child. One said so to please you; but how can you suppose one meant anything? What could I have done with you then⁠—a little thing among lots of people? Why, you wouldn’t have been allowed to come! It would have been bad for you. You would have heard things you oughtn’t to hear. You wouldn’t have let her come, would you, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John?”</p>
			<p>“Certainly not, my dear,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John, promptly. To tell the truth, it was she who had complained the most though it was Hester who had been most indignant. She forgot this, however, in the new interest of the moment. “It would never have done,” she said, with all sincerity. “Your cousin, of course, only spoke to please you, Hester. I never could have permitted you, a little thing at your lessons, to plunge into pleasure at that age.”</p>
			<p>“Then why⁠—” cried Hester, open-mouthed; but when she had got so far she paused. What was the use of saying any more? She looked at them both with her large brown eyes, full of light and wonder, and a little indignation and a little scorn, then stopped and laughed, and changed the subject. “When I go to Cousin Catherine’s,” she said, “which I never do when I can help it, we stand in a corner all the evening, my mother and I. We are thankful when anyone speaks to us⁠—the curate’s daughters and the Miss Reynoldses and we⁠—There is never anybody to take us in to supper. All the Redborough people sweep past while mamma stands waiting; and then perhaps some gentleman who has been down once before takes pity, and says, ‘Haven’t you been down to supper, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Vernon? Dear me! then let me take you.’ You will please to remember that my mother is <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Vernon, Ellen, and not <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John.”</p>
			<p>“I only say it for⁠—short,” said Ellen, apologetically; “and how can I help what happens at Aunt Catherine’s? I don’t go in for her ways. I don’t mean to do as she does. Why do you talk of Aunt Catherine to me?”</p>
			<p>“It is only to let you see that I will not be treated so,” the girl said with indignation. “If you think I will go to your house like that, just because you are a relation, I won’t, Ellen; and you had better understand this before we begin.”</p>
			<p>“What a spitfire it is!” said Ellen, raising her hand with a toss of all her bracelets to brush Hester’s downy cheek with a playful touch. “To think she should put all these things down in her book against us! I should never remember if it were me. I should be furious for the moment, and then I should forget all about it. Now, Hester, you look here. I am not asking you for your own pleasure, you silly; I am asking you to help <em>me</em>. Don’t you see that makes all the difference? You are no good to Aunt Catherine. She doesn’t need you. She asks you only for civility. But it stands to reason, you know, that I can’t look after all the people myself if I am to have any of the fun. I must have someone to help me. Of course you will have every attention paid you; for, don’t you see, you are wanted. I can’t get on without you. Oh, <em>of course</em>, that makes all the difference! I am sure your mamma understands very well, even if you are too young and too silly to understand!”</p>
			<p>“Yes, Hester, your cousin is quite right,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John, eagerly. The poor lady was so anxious to secure her child’s assent to what she felt would be so manifestly for her advantage that she was ready to back up everything that Ellen said. A spark of animation and new life had lighted up in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John’s eyes. It was not a very elevated kind of hope perhaps, yet no hope that is centred in the successes of another is altogether ignoble. She wanted to see her child happy; she wanted Hester to have her chance, as Ellen said. That she should be seen and admired and made much of, was, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John felt, the first object in her life. It would not be without some cost to herself, but she did not shrink from the idea of the lonely evenings she would have to spend, or the separation that might ensue. Her mind, which was not a great mind, jumped forward into an instant calculation of how the evening dresses could be got, at what sacrifice of ease or comfort. She did not shrink from this, whatever it might be. Neither did she let any visionary pride stand in her way as Hester did. She was ready to forgive, to forget, to condone all offences⁠—and in the long discussion and argument that followed, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John was almost more eloquent than Ellen on the mutual advantages of the contract. She saw them all the instant they were set before her. She was quite tremulous with interest and expectation. She ran over with approval and beaming admiration as Ellen unfolded her plans. “Oh, yes, I can quite understand; you want to strike out something original,” cried <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John. “You must not think I agree with Hester about Catherine’s parties. I think Catherine’s parties are very nice; and relations, you know, must expect to give way to strangers, especially when there are not enough of gentlemen; but it will be much pleasanter for you to strike out something original. I should have liked it when I was in your circumstances, but I don’t think I had the energy. And I am sure if Hester can be of any use⁠—Oh, my darling! of course you will like it very much. You always are ready to help, and you have plenty of energy⁠—far more than I ever had⁠—and so fond of dancing too; and there are so few dances in Redborough. Oh, yes, I think it is a capital plan, Ellen! and Hester will be delighted to help you. It will be such an opening for her,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John said, with tears of pleasure in her eyes.</p>
			<p>Hester did not say much while the talk ran on. She was understood to fall into the scheme, and that was all that was necessary. But when Ellen, after a prolonged visit and a detailed explanation to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John, which she received with the greatest excitement and interest, of all her arrangements as to the music, the suppers, and every other particular they could think of between them, rose to take her leave, she put her hand within Hester’s arm, and drew her aside for a few confidential words.</p>
			<p>“Don’t think of coming to the door,” she said to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John; “it is so cold you must not stir. Hester will see me out. There is one thing I must say to you, dear,” she added, raising herself to Hester’s ear when they were out of the mother’s hearing, “and you are not to take it amiss. It must be a condition beforehand⁠—now please, Hester, mind, and don’t be offended. You must promise me that you will have nothing to say to either of the boys.”</p>
			<p>The quick flush of offence sprang to Hester’s face.</p>
			<p>“I don’t know what you mean. You mean something you have no right to say, Ellen!”</p>
			<p>“I have a very good right to say it⁠—for I’m a married lady, and you are only a girl, and of course I must know best. You are not to have anything to say to the boys. Anyone else you like. I am sure I don’t mind, but will do anything I can to help⁠—but not the boys. Oh, I know something about Harry. I know you have had the sense to⁠—Well, I don’t understand how far it went, but I suppose it must have gone as far as it could go, for he’s not clever enough to be put off with anything less than a real No. But you may have changed your mind, or a hundred things might happen. And then there’s Edward; Aunt Catherine would be wild if anything got up between you and Edward. Oh, I think it’s always best to speak plain, and then one has nothing to reproach one’s self with after. She would just be <em>wild</em>, you know. She thinks there is nobody good enough for him; and you and she have never got on. Oh, I don’t suppose there’s anything between you and Edward. I never said so; the only thing is you must promise me to have nothing to say to <em>them</em>. There are plenty of others⁠—much better matches, and more eligible: and it’s always a pity to have anything to say to a cousin in that way. You’re sure to set the family by the ears; and then it narrows the connection, and you keep always the same name; and there are ever so many drawbacks. So just you promise me, Hester, there’s a dear⁠—never,” said Ellen, seizing her with both hands, and giving her a sudden perfumy kiss, “never!” and the salute was repeated on the other cheek, “to have <em>anything</em> to say to the boys⁠—”</p>
			<p>“The boys! if you think I care anything for the boys! I shall have nothing to say to anybody,” cried Hester, with indignation, drawing herself out of this too urgent embrace. Ellen tossed back all her bracelets, and shook her golden locks and her sealskin hat, and made an agitation in the air of scent and sound and movement.</p>
			<p>“Oh, that’s being a great deal too good,” she cried.</p>
			<p>Hester stood at the door, and looked on while <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Algernon got into her victoria and drew the fur rug over her, and was driven away, waving the hand and the bracelets in a parting jingle. The girl was not envious, but half-contemptuous, feeling herself in her poverty as much superior to this butterfly in furs and feathers, as pride could desire. Hester did little credit to the social gifts, or the popularity or reputed cleverness in her own way, of her gay cousin who had been the inspiration of Harry, and now was the guide of Algernon Merridew. She said to herself with the downrightness of youth, that Ellen was a little fool. But her own cheeks were blazing with this parting dart which had been thrown at her. The boys! She had a softened feeling of amity towards Harry, who had done all a stupid young man could do to overcome the sentence of disapproval under which Hester was aware she lay. It had been embarrassing and uncomfortable, and had made her anything but grateful at the moment; but now she began to feel that Harry had indeed behaved like a man, and done all that a man could to remedy her false position, and give her a substantial foundation for the native indomitable pride which none of them could crush, though they did their best. No; she would have nothing to say to Harry. She shook her head to herself, and laughed at the thought, all in the silence of the verandah, where she stood hazily gazing out through the dim greenish glass at Ellen, long after Ellen had disappeared. But Edward! that was a different matter altogether. She would give no word so far as he was concerned. Edward was altogether different from Harry. He piqued and excited her curiosity; he kept her mind in a tremor of interest. She could not cease thinking of him when she was in his neighbourhood, wondering what he would do, what he would say. And if it did make Catherine <em>wild</em>, as Ellen said, that was but an inducement the more in Hester’s indignant soul. She had no wish to please Catherine Vernon. There had not been any love lost between them from the first, and Hester was glad to think she was not one of those who had in any way pretended to her kinswoman’s favour. She had never sought Catherine, never bowed the knee before her. When she went to the Grange it had been against her will, as a matter of obedience to her mother, not to Catherine. If it made Catherine wild to think that there was a friendship, or any other sentiment between Edward and the girl whom she had so slighted, then let Catherine be wild. That was no motive to restrain Hester’s freedom of action. All this passed through her mind as she stood in the verandah in the cold, gazing after Ellen, long after Ellen was out of sight. There were many things which gave her a sort of attraction of repulsion to Edward. He had tried to deceive Roland Ashton about her, telling him she was about to marry Harry, when he knew very well she had refused to marry Harry. Why had he done it? And in his manner to herself Edward was two men. When they were alone he was more than friendly; he was tender, insinuating, anxious for her approval, eager to unfold himself to her. But when he saw her in the Grange drawing-room he never went near her. In early times she had asked why, and he had answered with deceiving words, asking how she thought he could bear to approach her with commonplace civilities when she was the only creature in the place for whom he cared at all, a speech which had pleased Hester at first as something high-flown and splendid, but which had not preserved its effect as time went on: for she could not see why he should not be civil, and show some regard for her presence, even if he could not devote himself to her. And why could he not devote himself to her? Because it would displease Catherine. When Catherine was not present, there was nobody for him but Hester. When Catherine was there, he was unconscious of her existence. This, of course, should have shown clearly to Hester that he was not worthy of her regard, and to some degree did so. But the conviction was mingled with so lively a curiosity in respect to him, so strong an opposition as regarded her, that Hester’s moral judgment was confused altogether. She was anxious, eager to overcome her adversary, excited to know what Edward’s meaning was. He would not stand up for her like a true friend, but at the same time he would never let her alone, he would still let her see that she was in his mind. She disliked him, yet⁠—She almost loved him, but still⁠—Nothing could be more tantalising, more entirely unlike indifference. To think of meeting Edward in society, yet not under Catherine’s eye, made her heart beat loudly. She had never done this hitherto. She had met him by chance on the Common or in the country roads about, and his voice had been almost that of a lover. She had met him before the world, and he had scarcely seemed to know her. But how could these meetings test what he meant? This it was that made Ellen’s proposal exciting, even while she herself half scorned it. Harry? no! Poor Harry! she would not disturb his peace, nor say a word, nor even look a look which should put him in jeopardy. But Edward?⁠—ah! that was a different matter. It was with all the vehemence of a quarrel that she snatched at the chance put into her hands, even when she had seemed to scorn it. To know what he meant⁠—to know what was his real state of mind. If he would be afraid of what the world would say, as well as of what Catherine would say⁠—in that case there was no scorn which Hester did not feel herself capable of pouring out upon her unworthy admirer; but if things proved different? Ah! then she did not know what softening, what yielding, she might not be capable of. The very thought melted her heart.</p>
			<p>And yet she had thought herself more “interested” (this was what she called it) in Roland Ashton than in any man whom she had ever heard of before. The world had seemed all blank to her when he went away. His step at the door had made her heart thrill: the commonplace day had brightened up into something smiling and sweet when he came in. But then she had not been fighting a duel with him half her life as she had been doing with Edward. She was not curious, <i xml:lang="fr">intriguée</i>, to know what Roland meant. She thought (with a blush) that she did know⁠—more or less⁠—what he meant. But Edward was a sort of sphinx; he was an enemy to be beaten, a riddle to be read. She said to herself, what would please her best would be to force him into self-abandonment, to carry him so out of himself that he should give up all pretences and own himself at her disposal, and then to turn her back upon him and scorn him. Would she have done so? she thought she would, and that in this lay the secret of her interest in Edward and his crooked ways. And now, here was the trial approaching. She would see what was his true mettle, she would be able indeed to judge of him now.</p>
			<p>“Hester,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John appearing at the open door, “what do you mean by lingering in the cold, to get your death? You will be chilled to your very bones. You have not even a shawl on, and in this cold place. What are you doing? I have called you three times, and you never paid any attention. Even to stand here for five minutes freezes me.”</p>
			<p>“Then don’t stand here, mamma,” said Hester, taking hold of her mother’s arm and thus leading her back in the old way. They did not walk about very much together now. Hester preferred her own thoughts to her mother’s society, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John was not sorry to be left quietly by herself at the fireside. How long it seemed since the time when she held her mother’s arm clasped in hers whenever she moved, and used it as a helm to guide that timid and trustful woman wherever she would! A little compunction came over her as she made use of that well-known expedient again, and steered her mother (all the more gently for that thought) back to her own chair.</p>
			<p>“Yes, yes, dear, this is very comfortable,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John, “but I wish you had come at once, when I called you, for we must not lose any time in thinking about your dresses. You must do Ellen credit, that is one thing clear. I can’t have you dowdy, Hester. The Merridew girls shall not have a word to say about the Vernons on your account. Oh, I know they will if they can; they will whisper and say how proud we all are, and give ourselves airs, and just look at Hester in a washed muslin! I would rather go without my dinner,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John with vehemence, “for a whole year.”</p>
			<p>“But I shall not let you do that, mamma.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, Hester, just hold your tongue. What do you know about it? I would rather sell my Indian shawl, or my pearls⁠—Dear me, what a good thing I did not part with my pearls! that is something nobody can turn up their noses at. And you can say you got them from your mother, and your grandmother before her⁠—which is more than they ever had. But there are the dresses to be thought of,” said the tender mother, looking in Hester’s face, half awed, half appealing: for even in the pride of descent she was forced to remember that you cannot send your child to a Thé Dansante with nothing but a string of pearls round her neck, however fine, and however long in the family it may have been.</p>
			<p>“Dresses! one will do,” said Hester, with a little flush of pleasure, yet determination to repress her mother’s unnecessary liberality. “You forget what you are talking of, mother dear. One dress is as much as⁠—”</p>
			<p>“And to whom do you suppose you are speaking,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John with dignity; “there are a great many things which you think you know better than I. Perhaps you are wrong there too; but I am not going to bandy words with you. One thing I must say, that when we talk of ball dresses I know a great deal better than you. Oh, but I do⁠—I had to get everything for myself in old days. Your father delighted in seeing me fine, but he never pretended to have any taste. All the responsibility was on me. Considering that we are poor, and that you are so young, I should think tulle would do: or even tarlatan. Hester, I should like you to have silk slips, that gives a character to a thing at once. A white one, a pink one, and a blue one⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Dear mamma, a white frock, that is all I want. I am sure that is all I want; we can’t afford any more. And as for silk slips⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Oh, hold your tongue, Hester, what do you know about it?” cried <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John, exasperated. “You have never been at a ball in your life. You can’t know what’s wanted, like me. There are quantities of other things besides. Shoes⁠—you must have satin shoes and silk stockings, and gloves, and something to wear in your hair. I don’t even know what’s worn now. We used to have wreaths in my day, but perhaps that’s not the fashion at present. When I had not a maid⁠—and of course, poor child, you have no maid⁠—I used to have a hairdresser to do my hair when I was going out. We wore it quite high on the top of our heads, and now you wear it down in the nape of your neck. What a thing fashion is! We had gigot sleeves all puffed out with feather cushions, and I used to wear a lace scarf which was very becoming. We had muslins in my time, nice clear book-muslins, and when you had worn it two or three times for balls you just wore it out in the evenings at home. Tarlatan is not half so profitable,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John, with a very serious face, “but you must have it, I suppose, all the same.”</p>
			<p>“Mother,” said Hester, when her mother paused for breath, “I feel quite horrified at all this. Why should I dress up so fine for Ellen’s parties? I shall only be a sort of poor relation. My washed muslin will do very well. Nobody will expect anything better from me.”</p>
			<p>“Then that is just why you shall have something better,” said the poor lady, her pale countenance brightening with a pretty pink flush. “You shan’t go at all if you can’t go as my daughter should. You shall have a white first, and then a⁠—no, not a pink; pink used to be my colour, for you know I was pale, and my hair was plain brown, not like yours. Yours is a little too⁠—auburn⁠—for pink. You must have a blue for your second, with silk slips made very simply, and tarlatan over that. White shoes, and white gloves, and my pearls. Oh, how glad I am I kept my pearls! It will be such a pleasure, dear, to see you dressed, it will be like old times again. And you must ask Ellen what to wear in your hair, a wreath, or just one flower at the side, with a spray hanging down over your neck. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ashton, I am sure, would get it for me in town. For flowers and those sort of things one should always send to London. And you must have a fan. I wonder if my ivory fan would be old-fashioned? I must ask Ellen. And, dear child, don’t stand there doing nothing when there is not a moment to lose, but ring for the tea. We must have tea first. I always feel better after, and then we must put everything down upon paper, and calculate what it will cost, and how we are to do.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t want all that,” said Hester again: but the sound of it flattered her youthful ears; for she was only a girl, when all was said.</p>
			<p>“Don’t talk any nonsense, child, but ring for the tea,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John, feeling herself for once mistress of the occasion. “But Hester,” she added, in so solemn a tone that Hester came back half frightened to hear what it was, “if you ever have children, as I hope you will, be sure you have one of your girls taught how to cut out, and to look after the dressmaking. If we only could have them made at home, what a saving it would be!”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
