<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-25" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">A Double Mind</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Edward had drawn his bow at a venture when he made that statement about Catherine to Hester, and he was full of doubt as to how it would influence her. This was the first time almost that he had disregarded opinion and withdrawn the bolts and bars and let himself go. There was something in the atmosphere of the young house, all breathing of life and freedom, and daring disregard of all trammels, which got into his head in spite of himself. He had abandoned altogether the decorous habits of his life, the necessity which bound him as surely in a dance as at his office. On ordinary occasions, wherever a ball occurred in Redborough, Edward was aware beforehand which young ladies he would have to dance with, and knew that he must apportion his attentions rightly, and neglect nobody whose father or mother had been civil to him. He knew that he must not dance too often with one, nor sit out in corners, nor do anything unbecoming a young man upon whom the eyes of many were fixed. But the very air in the house of the Merridews was different from that of other places. There was a licence in it which existed nowhere else. He, the staid and grave, carried off Hester from her partners, appropriated her for a good part of the evening, sat with her hidden away among the ferns in the conservatory, and only resigned her when he was compelled to do so. Even then, by way of emphasising his choice of Hester, he scarcely danced at all after, but stood among the other disengaged men in the doorways, watching her and seizing every opportunity to gain her attention. He was startled at himself when he thought of it. He walked home in the middle of the night, in the faint wintry moonlight, following the old fly he heard lumbering off in the distance carrying her home, his mind filled with a curious excitement and sense of self-abandonment. He had always admired her⁠—her independence, her courage, her eager intelligence, had furnished him since she was a child with a sort of ideal. He had kept wondering what kind of woman she would grow up; and lo! here she was, a woman grown, drawing other eyes than his, the object of admiring glances and complimentary remarks. When he had seen her in her washed muslin at Catherine Vernon’s parties, she had still appeared to him a child, or little more than a child. He had still felt the superiority of his own position, and that the passing glance and shrug of familiar confidential half-apology would probably please her more than the ordinary attentions which he had to show among so many. But Hester, by Ellen Merridew’s side, a taller and grander woman, well-dressed, with her mother’s pearls about her white throat, which was as white as they, was a different creature altogether. To risk everything for a mere school-girl was one thing, but a stately young creature like this, at whom everybody looked, of whom everybody said, “<em>That</em> Hester Vernon? Dear me, I never thought she had grown up like that!” was a different matter. The sight of her had intoxicated Edward. Perhaps poor <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John’s pearls and the careful perfection of her dress had something to do with it. And the place intoxicated him. There every one was doing what seemed good in his own sight. There were few or none of those stern reminders which he had read elsewhere in the eyes of parents whose daughters were waiting to be danced with, the “Was-it-for-this-I-asked-you-to-dinner?” look, to which he had so often succumbed. For once he had lost his head; he was even vaguely conscious that he had come there with a sort of intention of losing his head, and for once thinking of his own pleasure, and nothing more. No doubt this had been in his mind: and the sudden sight of that white figure, all graceful and stately, and of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John’s pearls, had done the rest. But he was a little nervous next morning as he thought over what he had been doing; he did not bear Catherine’s questioning well at breakfast. When she asked him whom he had danced with, he made answer that he had danced very little. But yet he had enjoyed himself, oh yes. It had been so pretty a party that it had been pleasure enough to look on. He described the conservatory and its Chinese lanterns with enthusiasm. “It must, indeed, have been like fairyland⁠—or the fireworks at the Crystal Palace,” Catherine had said. And he had felt a bitter pang of offence, as she laughed. He did not feel, indeed, that he could bear any remarks of the kind, or depreciation of Ellen, for whom he felt a special kindness just now. When Catherine said, “But all this must have come to a great deal of money: Algernon Merridew has only a share in his father’s business, he has no private money, has he?⁠—but, of course I know he has no private means: and Ellen’s little money will soon go at that rate.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t suppose Chinese lanterns cost very much,” said Edward.</p>
			<p>“Your temper is doubtful this morning,” said Catherine, with a smile. “It is ‘on the go,’ which is usual enough after late hours and the excitement of a dance; but I don’t think you are often so much excited by a dance. Did you see some one whom you admired, Edward? I am sure, if she is a nice girl, I shall be very glad.”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps it would be as well not to try, Aunt Catherine; we might not agree about what a nice girl is.”</p>
			<p>“No?” said Catherine rather wistfully.</p>
			<p>She looked into his doubtful eyes across the breakfast table, and, perhaps for the first time, began to feel that she was not so very certain as she had once been as to what her boy meant. Was it possible after all, that perhaps the words upon which they agreed had different meanings to each? But this was only a passing cloud.</p>
			<p>“Who was the belle?” she said smiling; “you can tell me that, at least, if you can’t tell who you admired most.”</p>
			<p>Edward paused; and then an impulse of audacity seized him.</p>
			<p>“I don’t know if you will like it,” he said, “but if I must tell the truth, I think that girl at the Vernonry⁠—Hester, you know, who is grown up, it appears, and <em>out</em>⁠—”</p>
			<p>Catherine bore the little shock with great self-possession, but she felt it.</p>
			<p>“Hester. Why should you suppose I would not like it? She must be nineteen, and, of course, she is <em>out</em>. And what of her?” Catherine said, with a grave smile.</p>
			<p>She was vexed that Edward should be the one to tell her of the girl’s success, and she was vexed, too, that he should think it would displease her. Why should it displease her? He ought to have kept silence on the subject, and he ought not to have seemed to know that she had any feeling upon it: the suggestion hurt her pride.</p>
			<p>“Ellen seems to have taken her up. She has grown up much handsomer than I should have expected, and she was very well dressed, with beautiful pearls⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Ah!” said Catherine, with a long breath; “then her mother kept her pearls!” She laughed a moment after, and added, “Of course, she would; what could I have expected? She kept her settlement. Poor little thing! I suppose she did not understand what it meant, and that she was cheating her husband’s creditors.”</p>
			<p>“I never quite understood,” said Edward, “why you should have brought her here, and given her a house, when she is still in possession of that income.”</p>
			<p>“She has only a scrap of it. Poor little thing! She neither knew it was wrong to take it, nor that if she did keep it, it ought not to have been allowed to go for his after debts. She got muddled altogether among them. The greater part of it she mortgaged for him, so that there was only a pittance left. Whatever you may think, you young men, it is a drawback for a man when he marries a fool. And so she kept her pearls!” Catherine added, with a laugh of contempt.</p>
			<p>“Marrying a fool, however, must have its advantages,” said Edward, “since a woman with brains would probably have given up the settlement altogether.”</p>
			<p>“Advantages⁠—if you think them advantages!” Catherine said, with a flash of her eyes such as Edward had seldom seen. “And certainly would not have kept the pearls⁠—which are worth a good deal of money,” she added, however, with her habitual laugh. “I think they must have dazzled you, my boy, these pearls.”</p>
			<p>“I am sure they did,” said Edward composedly; “they took away my breath. I have seen her here often, a dowdy little girl” (he scorned himself for saying these words, yet he said them, though even his cheek reddened with the sense of self-contempt) “with no ornaments at all.”</p>
			<p>“No,” said Catherine; “to do <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John justice, she had as much sense as that. She would not have put those pearls on a girl’s neck, unless she was dressed conformably. Oh, she has sense enough for that. I suppose she had a pretty dress⁠—white? But of course it would be white; at the first ball⁠—and looked well, you say?”</p>
			<p>“Very handsome,” said Edward, gravely. He did not look up to meet the look of awakened alarm, wonder, doubt, and rousing up of her faculties to meet a new danger, which was in Catherine’s eyes. He kept his on his plate and ate his breakfast with great apparent calm, though he knew very well, and had pleasure in thinking, that he had planted an arrow in her. “By the way,” he said, after an interval, “where did John Vernon pick his wife up? I hear she is of good family⁠—and was it her extravagance that brought about his ruin? These are details I have never heard.”</p>
			<p>“It is not necessary to enter into such old stories,” said Catherine, somewhat stiffly. “He met her, I suppose, as young men meet unsuitable people everywhere; but we must do justice. I don’t think she had any share in the ruin, any more at least than a woman’s legitimate share,” she added, with a laugh that was somewhat grim. “He was fond of every kind of indulgence, and then speculated to mend matters. Beware of speculation, Edward. Extravagance is bad, but speculation is ruin. In the one case you may have to buy your pleasures very dear, but in the other there is no pleasure, nothing but destruction and misery.”</p>
			<p>“Is not that a little hard, Aunt Catherine? there is another side to it. Sometimes a colossal fortune instead of destruction, as you say; and in the meantime a great deal of excitement and interest, which are pleasures in their way.”</p>
			<p>“The pleasure of balancing on the point of a needle over the bottomless pit,” she said. “If I were not very sure that you have too much sense to be drawn into anything of the kind, I should take fright, to hear you say even as much as that. The very name of speculation is a horror to me.”</p>
			<p>“Yet there must always be a little of it in business,” he said, with a smile creeping about the corners of his mouth.</p>
			<p>“You think me old-fashioned in my notions, and with a woman’s incapacity to understand business; but in my day we managed to do very well without it,” Catherine said.</p>
			<p>“To think of a woman’s incapacity for business in your presence would be silly indeed. I hope I am not such an ass as that,” said Edward, looking up at her with a smile. And she thought his look so kind and true, so full of affectionate filial admiration and trust, that Catherine’s keen perceptions were of no more use to her than the foolishness of any mother.</p>
			<p>He returned to luncheon that day as if for the purpose of obliterating all disagreeable impressions, and it was on leaving the Grange to return to the bank that he met Hester and Emma. This confused and annoyed him for the moment. It was not so that he would have liked to meet the heroine of last night; and her unknown companion, and the highly inappropriate place of meeting, made the encounter still less to his taste. But when he had hurried on in advance he began to ask himself what was the meaning of Hester’s reluctance to walk with him, or even to speak to him, her attitude⁠—drawing back even from his greeting, and the clouded look in her eyes. It was natural that he should not wish to speak to her at the door of the Grange, but why she should wish to avoid him he could not tell. It would have been a triumph over Catherine to have thus demonstrated her acquaintance with him at Catherine’s very door. So Edward thought, having only the vulgar conception of feminine enmity. On the whole, seeing that he had sowed the seeds of suspicion in Catherine’s bosom, it was better that Hester should hold him at arm’s length. Yet he was piqued by it. When he reached the bank, however, news awaited him, which turned his thoughts in a different channel. He found Harry Vernon and Algernon Merridew in great excitement in the room which was sacred to the former. Ashton had made the first coup on their behalf. He had bought in for them, at a fabulously low price, certain stock by which in a few weeks he was confident they might almost double their ventures. To furnish the details of this operation is beyond the writer’s power, but the three young men understood it, or thought they understood it. Of course a skilful buyer prowling about a crowded market with real money in his pocket, knowing what he wants, and what is profitable, will be likely to get his money’s worth, whether he is buying potatoes or stock.</p>
			<p>“I saw it was very low,” said Merridew, “and wondered at the time if Ashton would be down upon it. I thought of writing to him, but on the whole I suppose it’s best not to cramp them in their operations. They ought to know their own business best.”</p>
			<p>“They shell it out when there’s a good thing going, these fellows do,” said Harry, out of his moustache.</p>
			<p>“And nobody has any money apparently,” Algernon said, with a laugh of pleasure, meaning to imply <em>save you and me</em>. “When money’s tight, that is the time to place a little with advantage,” he said with a profound air. “I think you should go in for it on a larger scale, you two fellows that have the command of the bank.”</p>
			<p>“I wouldn’t risk too much at once,” Harry said.</p>
			<p>Edward listened to their prattle with a contempt which almost reached the length of passion. To hear them talk as if they understood, or as if it mattered what they thought! His own brains were swelling with excitement. He knew that he could go a great deal further if he pleased, and that Harry’s share in the decision would be small. Dancing on the point of a needle over the bottomless pit! It was like an old woman’s insane objection to anything daring⁠—anything out of the common way. Ashton’s letter to him was far longer and more detailed than his communications with the others. He said plainly that here was an opportunity for an operation really upon a grand scale, and that there could be no doubt of a dazzling success. “You will communicate just as much or as little of this as you think proper to the others,” Roland wrote, and it was all that Edward could do to keep up an appearance of replying to them, of joining in their gratification as he pondered this much more important proposal. “It is not once in a dozen years that such a chance arises,” Roland said.</p>
			<p>Now Edward had nothing of his own to speak of, far less than the others, who each had a trifle of independent fortune. All that he could risk was the money of the bank. The profit, if profit there was, would be to the bank, and even that large increase of profit would have its drawbacks, for Catherine, who liked to know everything, would inquire into it, and in her opinion, success would be scarcely less dangerous than failure. He could not stop in the drab-coloured calm of the office where these two young idiots were congratulating each other, and trying to talk as if they knew all about it. His scorn of them was unspeakable. If they gained a hundred pounds their elation would be boundless. They were like boys sending out a little toy frigate and enchanted when it reached in safety the opposite side of the puddle. But Ashton meant business. It was not for this sort of trifling work that he had set himself to watch those fluctuations, which are more delicate than anything in nature they could be compared to. The blowing of the winds and their changes were prose compared to the headlong poetry of the money-market. Edward felt so many new pulses waking in him, such a hurrying fever in his veins, that he could not control himself.</p>
			<p>“You’ll be here, I suppose, Harry, till closing time? I’m going out,” he said.</p>
			<p>“You going out⁠—you that never have anything to do out of doors! I had to umpire in a match on the other side of the Common,” said Harry, “but if you’ll just tell Cordwainer as you pass to get some one else in my place, I don’t mind staying. I’m sure you’ve done it often, Ned, for me.”</p>
			<p>“I am not in request, like you; but I have something I want to see to, to-day.”</p>
			<p>“All right,” said Harry. “Don’t you go and overdo it, whatever it is.”</p>
			<p>“You are seedy with staying up, dancing and flirting,” said young Merridew, with his imbecile laugh. “Nelly says she could not believe her eyes.”</p>
			<p>“I wish Ellen, and you too, would understand that dancing and flirting are entirely out of my way,” said Edward, with a flush of anger, as he took his hat and went out.</p>
			<p>Poor Algernon’s innocent joke was doubly unsuccessful, for Harry stood perfectly glum, not moving a muscle. He had not been at all amused by the proceedings of the previous night.</p>
			<p>“I wouldn’t report it, if I were you, when Ellen says silly things,” said her brother, as black as a thunder-cloud.</p>
			<p>“By Jove!” said poor Merridew, falling from his eminence of satisfaction into the ludicrous dismay of undeserved depreciation. He told his wife after, “They both set upon me tooth and nail, when I meant nothing but to be pleasant.”</p>
			<p>“I wish you would learn, Algernon, that it’s always wise to hold your tongue when I’m not there,” Ellen said. “Of course I understand my own family. And not much wonder they were vexed! Edward that doesn’t look at a girl because of Aunt Catherine, and Harry that she has snubbed so! You could not have chosen a worse subject to be pleasant upon,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ellen said.</p>
			<p>But it was not this subject that was in Edward’s mind as he sallied forth with the step and the air of that correct and blameless man of business which already all Redborough believed him to be. He had taken that aspect upon him in the most marvellous way⁠—the air of a man whose mind was balanced like his books, as regularly, and without the variation of a farthing. He was one of those who are born punctual, and already his morning appearance was as a clock to many people on the outskirts of Redborough. His hat, his gloves, his very umbrella, were enough to give people confidence. There was nobody who would have hesitated to entrust their money to his hands. But if Redborough could have known, as he passed along the streets, causing a little wonder to various people⁠—for already it had become a surprising fact that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Edward should leave business at so much earlier an hour than usual⁠—what a wild excitement was passing through Edward’s veins, the town would have been soared out of its composure altogether. He scarcely felt the pavement under his feet; he scarcely knew which way he was turning. The message for Cordwainer went out of his head, though he went that way on purpose. Several important questions had come before him to be settled since he had taken his place at the head of the bank. He had been called upon to decide whether here and there an old customer who had not thriven in the world should be allowed to borrow, or a new one permitted to overdraw; and in such cases he had stood upon the security of the bank with a firmness which was invulnerable, and listened to no weak voices of pity. But this was far more important than such questions as these. As his ideas disentangled themselves, there seemed to be two possibilities before him. If he threw himself into Ashton’s scheme at all, to do it as a partner in the business, not indeed with the sanction of his other partners, but, if there was risk to the firm in his proceedings at large, to make them profitable to it in case of success. In case of success! Of course there would be success. It was inevitable that they must succeed. On the other side, the expedient was to use the money and the securities of the bank, not for the aggrandisement of Vernon’s, but for his own. This would leave the responsibility of the action entirely upon his own shoulders if anything went wrong. And he did not refuse to give a rapid glance at that contingency. What could it mean to the bank? Not ruin⁠—he half-smiled as he thought. It would mean coming down perhaps in the world, descending from the prestige and importance of its present rank. And to himself it would mean going to the dogs⁠—anyhow, there could be no doubt on that point. But on the other side! that was better worth looking at, more worthy of consideration. It would be like pouring in new blood to stagnant veins; it would be new life coming in, new energy, something that would stir the old fabric through and through, and stimulate its steady-going, old-fashioned existence. It would be the something he had longed for⁠—the liberating influence, new possibilities, more extended work. He thought, with an excitement that gradually overmastered him, of the rush of gain coming in like a river, and the exhilaration and new force it would bring. This idea caught him up as a strong wind might have caught him, and carried him beyond his own control. He walked faster and faster, skimming along the road that led into the country, into the quiet, where no one could note his altered aspect or the excitement that devoured him, taking off his hat as he got out of sight of the houses, to let the air blow upon his forehead and clear his senses. And by and by things began to become more clear. He read Ashton’s letter over again, and with every word the way seemed to grow plainer, the risks less. It was as near a dead certainty as anything could be in business. “Of course there is always a possibility that something unforeseen may happen,” Ashton wrote, “and it is for you to weigh this. I think myself that the chance is so infinitesimal as not to be worth taking into consideration; but I would not wish to bias your judgment; the only thing is, that the decision must be immediate.” Now that the first shock of novelty was over, he felt it in his power to “weigh this,” as Ashton said. Getting familiarised with the subject made him more impartial, he said to himself. The first mention of it had raised a cowardly host of apprehensions and doubts, but now that the throbbing of excitement began to die away, he saw the matter as it was⁠—a question of calculation, a delicate operation, a good coup, but all within the legitimate limits of business. He had recovered, he felt, the use of his reason, which the novelty, the necessity for immediate determination, the certainty that he must take no counsel on the subject, that Harry would be dumbly obstinate, and Catherine anxiously, hortatively, immovably against it, had taken away. Harry was an ass, he said to himself, recovering his calm, and Aunt Catherine an old woman. What was the use of the faculties he possessed, and the position he had gained, if in such a crisis he could not act boldly and for himself!</p>
			<p>Thus it was with a very different aspect that Edward walked back. He put on his hat, feeling himself cooled and subdued; his pulses returned to their usual rate of beating, which was essentially a moderate one. And so rapidly had he skimmed over the ground, and so quick had been the progress both of his steps and his thoughts, that when he got back, with his mind made up, to the skirts of the Common, he saw the football party just beginning to assemble, and recollected that he had never given Harry’s message to Cordwainer, and that accordingly no new umpire could have been found in Harry’s place. But what did that matter? He reflected benevolently, with a contemptuous good nature, that he could get back to the bank in time still to liberate his cousin, so that everybody would be satisfied. This he did, stopping at the telegraph office on the way. His despatch was as follows:⁠—“Proceed, but with caution. Needful will be forthcoming.” He drew a long breath when he thus decided his fate; then he returned with all the ease and relief which naturally comes with a decision. The thing was done, whether for good or evil⁠—and there could be very little doubt that it was for good. His countenance was cheerful and easy as he returned to the bank.</p>
			<p>“I did not give your message, for my business did not keep me so long as I expected. Your football fellows are just collecting. You can get there, if you make haste, before they begin.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, thanks, awfully!” said Harry. “I hope you did not hurry, though I’m glad to go. I hope you understand I’m always ready to stay, Ned, when you want the time. Of course, you’re worth two of me here, I know that; but I can’t stand anything that’s not fair, and if you want to get away⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I don’t, old fellow; I’ve done my business. It did not take so long as I thought. You had better be off if you want to get there in time.”</p>
			<p>“All right,” said Harry. And he went off to his match in a softened state of mind, which, had he been able to divine it, would have astonished Edward greatly. Harry had seen Hester and her companion pass, and he felt a sad conviction that Edward’s sudden business had something to do with that apparition. Well! he had said to himself, and what then? Hadn’t he a right to try, the same as another? If she liked one better than the other, should the fellow she wouldn’t have be such a cad as to stand in her way? This was what had made Harry “fly out,” as Algy said, upon his brother-in-law; it had made him pass a very sombre hour alone in the bank. But in the revulsion of feeling at Edward’s rapid return, and the likelihood either that he had not seen Hester, or that she would have nothing to say to him, Harry’s heart was moved within him. Either his cousin was “in the same box” as himself and rejected, or else he was innocent altogether of evil intention⁠—and in either case Harry’s heart was soft to him: at once as one whom he had wronged, and as one who might be suffering with him under a common calamity.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
