<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-26" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>XXVI</h2>
				<h3>Straightforward</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>“I hope, Cousin Catherine,” said Emma, “that you will not think it is any want of civility on my part. I wished very much to come the first day. I went out with Hester Vernon, who is constantly at grandpapa’s⁠—and I was quite distressed, when I found we had to pass here, that she would not bring me in to call. But she seemed to think you would rather not. Of course I know that there are often tiffs in families, so I wouldn’t say anything. There are times when Elinor wouldn’t call on William’s wife not if life and death depended on it; so I understand quite well, and of course a stranger mustn’t interfere. Only I wish you to know that I had no wish to take sides, and didn’t mean to be rude. That was the last thing in the world I intended. Elinor has always told us younger ones so much about you.”</p>
			<p>“It is very kind of Elinor, I am sure; and you have behaved most judiciously,” said Catherine, with a twinkle in her eye. “It is unnecessary to say to a person of your judgment that in the best regulated family⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Oh, you needn’t tell me,” said Emma, shaking her head. “Nobody can know better than I do. It is very awkward when you are the youngest, and when you are expected by everybody to take their part. Of course they have all been very kind to me. I live part of my time with one, and part with another, and that is why every one thinks I should be on their side. But now I am very independent,” Emma said, “for Roland has taken me. I dare say he would tell you, Cousin Catherine, when he was here.”</p>
			<p>“That must be a very pleasant arrangement,” said Catherine, with a smile. “I suppose when you were with Elinor you had a good deal to do.”</p>
			<p>“I do Roland’s housekeeping now. I don’t wish to be idle,” said Emma. “But to be sure when there are children to be seen after you are never done, and especially boys. Elinor has five boys!⁠—it is something dreadful! The stockings and the mending you can’t think! It is very nice being with Roland; he is most kind. He gives me a regular allowance for my clothes, which I never got before, and I am sure it is very good of him; but you can’t have everything, you know, and it is a little dull. He is out all day, and often in the evenings, for of course I shouldn’t wish him to give up his gentlemen-engagements for me. I don’t think people should ever do that sort of thing. Tom Pinch is all very well in Dickens, but it would be inconvenient in actual life; for suppose you married?⁠—and of course that is what every girl expects to do.”</p>
			<p>“To be sure,” said Catherine. “Is there anything of that sort in prospect, if I may be permitted to ask?”</p>
			<p>“Of course, I am quite pleased that you should ask,” said Emma. “It would be such a comfort to have somebody like you to come and talk it over with, Cousin Catherine, if there was anything⁠—for I should feel sure you could tell me about my trousseau and all that. But there is nothing, I am sorry to say. You see I have had so little chance. Elinor took me out sometimes, but not much, and she was far more disposed to amuse herself than to introduce me. I don’t think that is nice in a married sister, do you? and speaking of that, Cousin Catherine, I am sure you will be kind enough to help me here. Grandpapa will not take any trouble about it. I asked the gentleman whom we met coming out of here, Hester and I⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Edward I think is his name.”</p>
			<p>“What of Edward?” said Catherine quickly, with a touch of alarm.</p>
			<p>“But nothing seems to have come of it,” said the persistent Emma. “He said he would try, and Hester made a sort of promise; but there has been one since and I have never been asked. It is your niece’s dance⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Merridew, I think, is her name. She gives one every week, and both for a little amusement, and that I mayn’t lose any chance that may be going, I should like very much to go. I don’t doubt that you could get me an invitation in a moment if you would just say you would like it.”</p>
			<p>Catherine’s consternation was ludicrous to behold. She was herself so much amused by the situation that she laughed till the tears stood in her eyes. But this matter-of-fact young woman who sat by and gazed upon her with such a stolid incapacity to see the joke, was of the side of the house to which Catherine could pardon anything⁠—the old captain’s grandchild, Roland’s sister. What would have been vulgar assurance in another, was amusing <i>naïveté</i> in Emma. When she had got over her laugh she said, with amused remonstrance as if she had been speaking to a child⁠—</p>
			<p>“But you must know, Emma, that these family tiffs you are so well accustomed to, come in to prevent this too. Ellen would not care for my recommendation. She is a very self-willed little person, and indeed the chief rebel of the family.”</p>
			<p>“That is all very well, Cousin Catherine,” said Emma with the downrightness of fact and certainty; “but you know you are the head of the family. You have got the money. If they were in trouble they would all have to come to you: and if you said “I wish this,” of course nobody would venture to refuse you. The most stupid person must be sure of that.”</p>
			<p>There was a commanding commonsense in this view that silenced Catherine. She looked at the young philosopher almost with awe.</p>
			<p>“Your arguments are unanswerable,” she said; “there is nothing to be said against such admirable logic.”</p>
			<p>“Then you will ask for an invitation for me?” said Emma. “I am sure I am much obliged to you, Cousin Catherine. It is always best to come to the fountain-head. And it isn’t as if I were going to cause any expense or trouble, for I have my ball-dress all ready. I have wore it only once, and it is quite fresh. It is my second ball-dress; the first I wore about a dozen times. Elinor gave it me, which was very kind of her. It was only muslin, but really it was very nice, and got up quite respectably. But this one I bought myself out of the allowance Roland gives me. Don’t you think it is very thoughtful of him? for of course what a sister buys for you, however kind she is, is never just the same as what you would choose for yourself.”</p>
			<p>“I suppose not⁠—I never had any experience,” said Catherine, gravely. “I am afraid, however, that you will not meet anybody who will much advance your views at Redborough. It is an old-fashioned, backward place. London would afford a much larger scope for any social operations. Indeed it is very condescending in a young lady from town to give any attention to us and our little parties down here.”</p>
			<p>“Oh!” said Emma, eager to correct a mistake, “that just shows how little people in the country know. You think London means the London you read of in books, where you meet all the great people and have half-a-dozen parties every night. But when London means Kilburn!” said Emma shaking her head, “where all the gentlemen go to the city every morning, and there is perhaps one dance given in a whole season, and only the people asked that you know! and we know scarcely one. You see the people there don’t think of calling because they are your neighbours. There are so many: and unless you get introductions, or work in the parish, or something⁠—Working in the parish is a very good way,” Emma added, with a sudden recollection; “you get invited to a great many evening parties where you just stand about and talk, or people sing: and not many dances. Unfortunately I never was much used to parish work. In Elinor’s there was too much to do, and Bee was too worldly, and as for William’s wife, though we should not like it to be known, Cousin Catherine, she is⁠—a Dissenter.”</p>
			<p>Emma made this admission with the reluctance it merited.</p>
			<p>“I have not told grandpapa,” she said, with bated breath.</p>
			<p>“I think he could bear it,” said Catherine. “I think you might venture on the communication. In some things he is very strong-minded.”</p>
			<p>“It was a very bitter pill to us,” Emma said.</p>
			<p>Here they were interrupted by the entrance of the captain himself, who had left his grandchild in a cowardly way to make Catherine’s acquaintance by herself. But Emma had not minded. She had not even divined that his pretence of business was hypocritical. She had not been alarmed by Catherine, and now she was comfortably confident of having made a good impression, and secured a friend.</p>
			<p>“I am quite ready, grandpapa,” she said. “Cousin Catherine has been so kind. She says she will speak to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Merridew about my invitation, so you may make yourself quite easy on that subject. And grandmamma will be very pleased. Of course I could not expect such an old lady as she is to exert herself. But Cousin Catherine understands how important that sort of thing is to a girl,” Emma said, with an air of great gravity.</p>
			<p>The captain gave Catherine a piteous glance. He did not understand the new specimen of womankind of whom he had the responsibility, and Catherine, whose powers of self-restraint had been called forth to an unusual degree, responded with an outburst of laughter.</p>
			<p>“We have got on admirably,” she said. “I like a straightforward mind, with such a power of applying reason to practical uses. You must come to see me often, Emma. Never mind grandpapa. He will tell you I am busy, but when I am so, I shall tell you so. You are far too sensible to take offence.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, offence, Cousin Catherine? between you and me!” said Emma, “that would be too ridiculous. I hope I know my place. When you are the youngest you soon learn that. Your first lesson is that nobody wants you, and that you must just do the best you can for yourself. There is only just one thing I should like to mention, and that is, that the first time it would be a great advantage to me if you would take me. It is such a fine thing for a girl when she is known to belong to the best people in a place. It is not even as if my name were Vernon. But people will say ‘Miss Ashton! who is Miss Ashton? I never heard of her!’ Whereas if I were with you, the best partners in the place would ask to get introduced to me, and that would give me a start. Afterwards I could get on by myself, as I hear <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Merridew does not care for chaperons,” Emma said.</p>
			<p>Once more Catherine was struck dumb. She pushed her chair back a little and regarded this dauntless young woman with a mixture of dismay, admiration, and amusement.</p>
			<p>“But I assure you I have never gone to any of Ellen’s junketings,” she said.</p>
			<p>“That will not matter,” said the persistent Emma, “Of course she will be pleased to have you. It will be a great honour. And then to me it would be such an advantage. I should feel that I really was having my chance.”</p>
			<p>When she left the gate of the Grange, walking by the side of the bewildered captain, Emma felt that she was tolerably sure of getting all she wanted, and her triumph, though quite moderate and serious, was great.</p>
			<p>“I am very glad you left me to make acquaintance with Cousin Catherine by myself,” she said, “grandpapa; I was a little frightened, but she was so nice. She was very nice to Roland too; and it will be such an advantage to go into society for the first time with such a well-known person. It makes all the difference. People see at once who you are, and there is no difficulty afterwards.”</p>
			<p>“And you think Catherine Vernon will depart from all her habits and take you to that butterfly’s ball?” the captain said.</p>
			<p>“Of course, grandpapa,” said Emma, in the calm of simple conviction. It was not a matter which admitted of any doubt.</p>
			<p>And the wonderful thing was, that she proved right. To her own great amazement, and to the consternation of everybody concerned, Catherine Vernon assumed her grey gown, the gayest of her evening garments, and most befitting a dance, and took Emma Ashton in her own carriage to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Merridew’s house on the hill. Catherine was too genial a person in ordinary society to exercise any discouraging influence upon the young party in general; but upon the members of her own family there was no doubt that she did have a subduing effect. Ellen’s face of consternation was the subject of remark in the family for years after; indeed, they spoke of “the night when Aunt Catherine came to the dance,” dating things from it, as people speak of a great national event. Harry was the one who showed himself most equal to the occasion. He established himself by Catherine’s side as a sort of guard of honour, relieving the frightened Algernon, who, what with pride and pleasure on his own part, and a wondering sympathy with Ellen’s dismay, did not know how to conduct himself in such an emergency. Edward did not appear at all. He had said he was very busy, and did not think it was possible he could go, as soon as he heard of Emma’s extraordinary request. And though Catherine was almost displeased by his defection, there was nothing to be said against so evident a necessity as that the most active partner in the bank should attend to his work. Her chief point of curiosity in the scene which she surveyed with amused disapproval and astonishment to find herself there, was Hester, to whom her eyes turned with the lively sense of opposition which existed always between the two.</p>
			<p>Catherine’s eyes, in spite of herself, turned from Emma’s insignificance to the fine indignant figure of the girl whom (she said to herself) she could not endure, with the most curious mixture of curiosity, and interest, and rivalship. She, Catherine Vernon, the rival of a trifling creature of nineteen! Such a sentiment sometimes embitters the feelings of a mother towards the girl of whom her son makes choice. But Catherine’s mood had nothing to do with Edward. It was more like the “taking sides,” which Emma was so anxious to demonstrate was impossible to her as a stranger. Hester had no separate standing ground, no might or authority, and yet it was no exaggeration to say that Catherine, with all of these advantages, instinctively looked upon her as a rival power.</p>
			<p>Hester was in the blue dress, which was the alternative of her white one. In those days there were no yellows or sage greens; and even before Catherine remarked the girl’s young freshness and beauty, or the high-thrown head, and indignant bearing, which denoted on Hester’s side a sense of Catherine’s inspection, her eyes had caught the glistening pearls on the young neck⁠—her mother’s pearls. Catherine looked at them with a mingled sense of pity and disdain. If that mother had been such a woman as Catherine, neither these pearls nor anything else of value would have remained in her hands. They were Catherine’s, they were the creditors’ by rights. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John was not wise enough to understand all that; but Hester, if she knew, would understand. Catherine could not keep her mind from dwelling upon these ornaments. If Hester knew, what would the girl do? Pocket the shame and continue to wear them as became <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John’s daughter, or tear them from her neck and trample them under foot? One or the other she would have to do⁠—but then, Hester did not know.</p>
			<p>As she walked about through the rooms, stopping to give a gracious word there, a nod here, a question about father or mother, Catherine’s mind was not occupied either with the house or the company, but with this girl. Hester had been in the background till now. A glimpse of her in the corner of her own drawing-room, standing by her mother’s side in her washed muslin, did not⁠—though Hester’s look was always one of indignation⁠—impress her relation’s mind. But here she stood like an equal, sending glances of defiance out of her brown eyes. Hester had come in the old fly with the white horse, while Emma was fetched from her grandfather’s by Catherine’s carriage. The contrast was striking enough; but Catherine, though she would not own it to herself, was more aware than any one else, that no one would look twice at Emma while Hester was by.</p>
			<p>When the evening was about half over, Emma came to her patroness and kindly gave her her dismissal.</p>
			<p>“Don’t wait longer on my account, Cousin Catherine,” she said. “I am quite nicely started; thank you so much. I have got my card filled; quite the nicest people in the room have asked me. I’m sure I am very grateful to you, for it is all your doing; but don’t think of waiting for me. Chaperons are not at all wanted, and I can go home in Hester’s fly. I am so much obliged to you, but of course you want to get to bed. Don’t stay a moment longer than you wish, for me.”</p>
			<p>Catherine smiled, but did not take any further notice. She walked about the rooms for some time after on the arm of Harry, who was always dutiful.</p>
			<p>“And who do you think is the prettiest person in the room, Harry? I excuse you from telling me it is my young lady, whom for my own part I don’t admire.”</p>
			<p>“I cannot see there is any doubt about it, Aunt Catherine,” said Harry, in his sturdy way. “It is my cousin Hester. There is an air about her⁠—I cannot explain it: I found it out long ago; but now everybody sees it.”</p>
			<p>“Thanks to her mother’s pearls,” said Catherine, with her laugh.</p>
			<p>Harry looked at her with startled eyes.</p>
			<p>“The pearls are very pretty on her; but they are nothing, to me at least,” he said.</p>
			<p>“You should not let her wear them. She should not have them; knowing her father’s story, as I suppose you do.⁠—Don’t you see,” cried Catherine, with sudden energy, “that she ought not to appear in Redborough in those pearls?”</p>
			<p>Emma had been standing near when this conversation began, and she drew closer to listen, not with any clandestine intention, but only with a natural curiosity. She caught up the words in a disjointed way. What reason could there be for not wearing your mother’s pearls? She would have gone and asked the question direct of Catherine, but that just then her partner came for her; and for the rest of the evening she had no time to consider any such question; nor was it till she found herself in the fly in the middle of the night rumbling and jolting along the dark road that skirted the Common, by Hester’s side, that this mysterious speech occurred to her mind. She had been talking of the advantage of being introduced by a well-known person and thus put at once “on a right footing.”</p>
			<p>“You don’t want that. You know everybody; you have been here all your life,” she said. “And I am sure you got plenty of partners, and looked very nice. And what a pretty necklace that is,” said Emma, artlessly entering upon her subject. “Are they real? Oh, you must not be offended with me, for I never had any nice ornaments. The youngest never has any chance. If they are real, I suppose they are worth a great deal of money; and you must be quite rich, or you would not be able to afford them.”</p>
			<p>“We are not rich; indeed we are very poor,” said Hester, “but the pearls are my mother’s. She got them when she was young, from her mother. They have belonged to us for numbers of years.”</p>
			<p>“I wonder what Cousin Catherine could mean!” said Emma innocently.</p>
			<p>“About my pearls?” cried Hester, pricking up her ears, and all her spirit awakening, though she was so sleepy and tired of the long night.</p>
			<p>“She said you oughtn’t to wear them. She said you shouldn’t have them. I wonder what she meant! And <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Harry Vernon, that tall gentleman, he seemed to understand, for he got quite red and angry.”</p>
			<p>“I oughtn’t to wear them⁠—I shouldn’t have them!” Hester repeated, in a blaze of wrath. She sat bolt upright, though she had been lying back in her corner indisposed for talk.</p>
			<p>“Oh, I dare say she didn’t mean anything,” said Emma, “only spite, as you are on the other side.”</p>
			<p>Hester did not reply, but she was roused out of all her sleepiness in a moment. She let Emma prattle on by her side without response. As they drove past the Grange a window was opened softly, and some one seemed to look out.</p>
			<p>“Oh, I wonder if that was <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Edward,” said Emma. “I wonder why he stayed away. Is he after some girl, and doesn’t want Cousin Catherine to know? If it were not that you would scarcely speak to each other when you met, I should say it was you, Hester.”</p>
			<p>“I wish,” said Hester severely, “that you would go to sleep; at three in the morning I never want to talk.”</p>
			<p>“Well, of course, it may be that,” said Emma somewhat inconsequently, “but I never want to sleep when I have been enjoying myself. I want to have some one in the same room and to talk it all over⁠—everything that has happened. Who was that man, do you know who⁠—”</p>
			<p>And here she went into details which Hester, roused and angry, paid no attention to. But Emma was not dependent on replies. She went on asking questions, of which her companion took no notice, till the fly suddenly stopped with a great jarring and rattling, and the opening of two doors, and glimmers of two small lights in the profound dark, gave note of watchers in the two houses, warned by the slow rumbling of the ancient vehicle, and glad to be released from their respective vigils. In Hester’s case it was her mother, wrapped in a warm dressing-gown, with a shawl over her head, and two anxious eyes shining out with warm reflections over her little candle, who received the girl in her finery with eager questions if she were very cold, if she were tired, if all had gone off well.</p>
			<p>“Run up stairs, my darling, while I fasten the door,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John said. “There is a nice fire and you can warm yourself⁠—and some tea.”</p>
			<p>In those days people, especially women, were not afraid of being kept awake because of a cup of tea.</p>
			<p>“Mamma,” said Hester when her mother followed her up stairs into the old-fashioned, low-roofed room, which the fire filled with rosy light, “it appears that Catherine Vernon says I ought not to wear your pearls. Has she anything to do with your pearls? Has she any right to interfere?”</p>
			<p>“My pearls!” cried <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John almost with a scream. “What could Catherine Vernon have to do with them? I think, dear, you must have fallen asleep and been dreaming. Where have you seen Catherine Vernon, Hester? She gives us our house, dear; you know we are so far indebted to her: but that is the only right she can have to interfere.”</p>
			<p>“Had she anything to do with my father?” Hester asked.</p>
			<p>She was relieved from she did not know what indefinable terrors by the genuine astonishment in her mother’s face.</p>
			<p>“Anything to do with him? Of course; she had a great deal to do with him. She was his first cousin. Her father had brought him up. It was intended⁠—⁠but then he met me,” said the gentle little woman, not without a tone of satisfaction in the incoherent tale. “And she was a kind of partner, and had a great deal to do with the bank. I never understood the rights of it, Hester. I never had any head for business. Wait, darling, till I undo these buttons. And now, my love, if you have got warm, go to bed. My pearls! She must mean, I suppose, that they are too good for you to wear because we are poor. They were my mother’s, and her mother’s before that. I would like to know what Catherine Vernon could have to say to them,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John said, taking the pearls from her child’s throat and holding them up, all warm and shining, to the light, before she deposited them in their carefully padded bed.</p>
			<p>If there was anything in the world that was her individual property, and in which no one else had any share, it was her pearls: they had always been one of her household gods.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
