<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-19" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Confidences</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>“I would not speculate if I were you,” said Ashton. “What would be the good? You are very well off as you are. You are making your fortune steadily, far better than if you did it by a successful coup. Yes, yes, I can understand that a man should desire a little more excitement, and rebel against the monotony of a quiet life, but not you, Vernon, if you’ll excuse my saying so. You don’t go in for any sort of illegitimate pursuit. You don’t play or bet; you have no claim upon you that you want extraordinary means of supplying⁠—”</p>
			<p>“How can you tell all that?” said Edward Vernon. “Do you think life’s so easy a business that you can read it off from the surface, and make sure that everything is as it seems?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t say that. Of course, I go upon appearances. I can understand that perhaps you are tired of it⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Tired of it!” He twirled his stick violently in his hand, hitting at the rusty bramble branches and gorse bushes that bordered the Common as if they were his enemies. “I suppose one is apt to tire of anything that lasts and never varies,” he cried with a forced laugh. “Yes, I am tired of it. Quiet life and safe business, and the hope of making a fortune, as you call it, steadily, in twenty or thirty years⁠—Good life! Twenty or thirty years! Only think of the number of days in that, one after the other, one exactly like the other. I begin to feel as if I should welcome anything to break the monotony⁠—crime itself.”</p>
			<p>“That means, old fellow,” said Ashton, soothingly, “nerves, and nothing more.”</p>
			<p>Edward laughed out, a laugh which was not harmonious with the soft dullness of the autumnal atmosphere. “I have no nerves, nor tastes nor inclinations, nor any mind of my own,” he said. “I do what it is the right thing to do. Though I am sick of it, I never show that. Nobody here has the slightest idea that I was ever impatient or irritable or weary in my life.”</p>
			<p>Ashton looked at him with some curiosity, but took no further notice. “Does Miss Vernon,” he said, “take any share in the business of the bank⁠—I mean, in the work, in the regulations?”</p>
			<p>“Miss Vernon,” said Edward, “takes a share in everything that is going on around her, it does not matter what. She has been so long used to be at the head of everything, that she thinks it her natural place; and, as she is old and a woman, it stands to reason⁠—”</p>
			<p>“But she is a very intelligent woman; and she must have a great deal of experience.”</p>
			<p>“The experience of a little country town, and of steady business, as you call it⁠—oh, she has all that. But put your own views before her, or suggest even the advantages of the circulation of money, quick turning over, and balance of losses and gains⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I can understand that,” said Ashton, “You don’t appreciate the benefits of the Conservative element, Vernon. But for you and your steady-going banks, how could we operate at all? The money must be somewhere. We can’t play with counters only in this game.”</p>
			<p>“There was no question of counters,” said Edward; “we have the money in our hands. It seems to me that you and I should change places: you to do the steady business here, and please Aunt Catherine⁠—who has taken a great fancy to you, you must know⁠—I, to watch the tide, how it comes and how it goes.”</p>
			<p>“There might be worse arrangements,” Ashton said with a laugh: but he added quickly, meeting a keen, sudden glance from Edward, “if you could transfer to me your training, and I mine to you. I am counted rather bold sometimes, you must know,” he added, after a moment, returning that look. They talked with great apparent readiness and openness, but with a curious dread of mutual observation going on under the current of their talk all the time.</p>
			<p>“So much the better,” said Edward, “so long as you know when to hold in.”</p>
			<p>They were going along the side of the Common between the Grange and the Vernonry. It was Sunday afternoon⁠—a dull day, the sky hanging low, the green parts of the Common very green, glistening with wetness, the gorse and brushwood very brown and faded. Nobody was about on this day of leisure. Even the slow country cart, the farmer’s shandry, the occasional roll of a carriage, was absent from the silent road. There were no nursemaids and children from Redborough picking their way along the side path. Captain Morgan, feeling his rheumatism, had retired to his chimney corner; the young men had it all to themselves. Ashton had been lunching at the Grange. He was on the eve of going back to town to business, from which he declared he had been absent far too long. The object of his visit was not very clear to anyone: he had left his grandparents for years without showing so much interest in them. But, whatever his motive had been, his expedition had not been without fruit. He had discovered a new and wealthy vein well worth working, and lit a fire which, no doubt, would light up still further illuminations, in some inflammable spirits. No one had received him more warmly than Edward Vernon, but he was less easy to make out than the others. He was less simple; his life did not correspond with the betrayals of his conversation, whereas neither Harry Vernon nor his brother-in-law, had anything to betray. What was evident, at least, was that Catherine Vernon smiled upon the acquaintance which had been formed so rapidly between her nephew and the stranger. She called Edward “your cousin” to Ashton, then laughed and apologised, explaining that where there were so many cousins it was difficult to remember that her relation was not Edward’s too. When Ashton replied, “There is connection enough to justify the name, if it is agreeable to Vernon,” there could be no doubt that it was, at least, agreeable to her. She smiled upon them from her window as they went out together, waving her hand. And no foolish mother could have been more unaware than Catherine, that the knowledge that she was there, watching with tender looks of affection the two figures as they went along, was to Edward irksome beyond expression. He felt no charm of love in the look, but substituted suspicion for tenderness, and believed that she was watching them, keeping them in sight as far as her eyes could carry, to spy out all they did, and make for herself an explanation of every gesture. He would not even have twirled his stick and cut down the brambles but in a momentary fit of forgetfulness. When they got beyond her range, he breathed more freely, but, even then, was not without a recollection that she had her opera-glasses at hand, and might, through them, be watching his demeanour still.</p>
			<p>“Let us go this way,” he said, turning into the road, which slanted away on the nearer side of the Vernonry, leading out into the open country and brown fields.</p>
			<p>Ashton hesitated a moment. “I am not sure that I am not expected at home. It is my last day,” he said.</p>
			<p>“Home is a kind of irons,” said Edward, “handcuffs, ankle chains. One is always like an unhappy cockatoo on a perch. Any little attempt at flight is always pulled back.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t think that is my experience. My old people are very indulgent; but then, I am a mere visitor. Home does not mean much to me,” said Ashton. If he had been in the presence of any lady he would have sighed as he said this⁠—being in absolute freedom with one of his own kind he smiled, and it was Edward who sighed.</p>
			<p>“There is such a thing as having too much of it,” he said. “What I suffer from is want of air. Don’t you perceive it? There is no atmosphere; every breath has been breathed over and over again. We want ventilation. We welcome every horror with delight in consequence⁠—a murder⁠—or even a big bankruptcy. I suppose that is why bankruptcies are so common,” he added, as if struck with the idea. “A man requires a great deal of original impulse before he will go the length of murder. The other has a milder but similar attraction; you ruin other people, which shakes them up, and gives a change of air.”</p>
			<p>“Ill-omened words,” said Ashton, laughing, and throwing out the forefinger and little finger of his right hand with a play at superstition. “Ugly at all times, but especially when we are talking of business and the Stock Exchange.”</p>
			<p>“Are you aware,” said Edward, sinking his voice, “that our predecessor, before Aunt Catherine, did something of the kind?”</p>
			<p>“Who was he?”</p>
			<p>“A certain John Vernon. His wife lives yonder, with the rest of Aunt Catherine’s dependents in that red house. He found it too much for him; but it was a poor sort of a flash in the pan, and hurt nobody but himself.”</p>
			<p>“You would like to do more than that,” said Ashton, with a laugh.</p>
			<p>But in Edward’s face there was no jest.</p>
			<p>“I should like,” he said, “if I broke down, to carry the whole concern along with me. I should like to pull it down about their ears as Samson pulled the temple, you know, upon his persecutors.”</p>
			<p>“Vernon,” said Roland, “do you know that you are very rash, opening out like this to me? Don’t you see it is quite possible I might betray you? I have no right to preach, but surely you can’t have any reason to be so bitter. You seem tremendously well off, I can tell you, to a friendless fellow like me.”</p>
			<p>“I am very well off,” said Edward, with a smile; “no man was ever better. I came out of a struggling family where I was to have gone to the colonies or something. My next brother got that chance, and here I am. John Vernon, so far as I can hear, was an extravagant fool. I have not the least sympathy with that. Money’s a great power, but as for fine houses, or fine furniture, or show or dash as they call it⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I told you,” said Ashton, “you have no vice.”</p>
			<p>Edward gave him a dark, suspicious look.</p>
			<p>“I have even a contempt for it,” he said.</p>
			<p>“There are plenty of men who have that⁠—a horror even; and yet can’t do without the excitement.”</p>
			<p>“I prefer your sort of excitement. John Vernon, as I say, was a fool. He ran away, poor wretch, and Catherine stepped in, and remade everything, and covered him with contempt.”</p>
			<p>“He is the father (is he dead?) of the⁠—young lady⁠—who is such a favourite with my grandfather?”</p>
			<p>“Hester? Oh, you know her, do you? One of Aunt Catherine’s pensioners in the Vernonry, as she calls it.”</p>
			<p>“It is a little hard upon them to be called dependents; my old people live there. They have their own little income to live upon. Miss Vernon gives them their house, I believe, which is very kind, but not enough to justify the name of pensioners.”</p>
			<p>“That is our way here,” said Edward laughing. “We are very ready to give, but we like to take the good of it. It is not respectful to call the place the Vernonry, but we do it. We are delighted to be kind; the more you will take from us, the better we will like you. We even⁠—rather like you to be ungrateful. It satisfies our theory.”</p>
			<p>“Vernon, all that seems to me to be diabolical, you know, I wish you wouldn’t. Miss Hester is a little of your way of thinking, I fear. She makes it amusing though. There are parties, it appears, where she stands all night in a corner, or looks at photographs.”</p>
			<p>“She says that, does she?” said Edward. His smile had not been a pleasant one, but now it disappeared from his face. “And I suppose she tells you that I never go near her? I have to look after the old ladies and take them to supper. I have the honour of standing in the position of master of the house.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know that she blames anyone,” said Ashton indifferently. “It is more fun than anger. Talk of want of air, Vernon; that poor child wants air if you please. She is as full of spirit and life as anyone I ever saw. She would like to do something.”</p>
			<p>“Something! What kind of something? Go on the stage⁠—or what?”</p>
			<p>“I have never heard of the stage or anything of the kind. She wants work.”</p>
			<p>“Excitement!” Edward said, with an impatient gleam in his eyes.</p>
			<p>“She is like you then,” said Ashton, trying to laugh, but not with much cordiality, for he felt himself growing angry in spite of himself.</p>
			<p>There was excitement enough now in Edward Vernon’s face. It grew dark with passion and intolerance.</p>
			<p>“A woman is altogether different,” he said; then subduing himself with a change in his voice from rage to scorn, “she will soon have it in her power to change all that. Don’t you know she is going to marry Harry Vernon?⁠—an excellent match for her⁠—money and little brains⁠—whereas she has much brains and little money, the very thing in marriage,” he concluded, with a harsh laugh.</p>
			<p>“Is that so?” said Ashton.</p>
			<p>He had been listening quite at his ease, turning his face towards his companion, and it was a satisfaction to Edward to see that the stranger’s countenance clouded over. He was astonished, and Edward could not help hoping more than astonished⁠—for being sore and bitter himself he liked to see another feel the sting.</p>
			<p>“That’s well,” Roland said after a moment, “if she likes it. I should not have thought⁠—but a week’s acquaintance does not show you much of a character. I am glad to hear it,” he said, after a pause, “if she likes it,” which was but a dubious sort of satisfaction after all.</p>
			<p>Edward looked at him again with an expression of gratified feeling. He was glad to have given his new friend a little friendly stab. It pleased him to see Roland wince. When one is very uneasy one’s self, that is always a little consolation. He looked at him and enjoyed it, then turned away from the subject which had given him this momentary pleasure.</p>
			<p>“Let us return to our muttons,” he said. “Tell me what you think of these papers? I put them into my pocket to show you. Now that we are fairly out of sight”⁠—then he turned back to glance along the still damp road, upon which there was not a single shadow but their own⁠—“and nobody can spy upon us⁠—for I distrust windows⁠—we may think of business a little,” the young man said.</p>
			<p>Ashton looked at him as he took the papers with a glance as suspicious as his own. They had grown into a sort of sudden intimacy in a single night. Edward had been exactly in the state of mind to which Roland’s revelation of chances and possibilities was as flame to tinder. To have his impatient desires and longings made practical was everything to him, and the prudence and business instinct left in him which made him hesitate to make the plunge by himself without skilled guidance, endowed the newcomer with an importance which nothing else could have given him. He was at home in those regions which were so entrancing and exciting, yet strange to Edward. These communications had brought them to something like confidential friendship, and yet they did not know each other, and in many things were mutually antipathetic, repelling, rather than attracting each other. This interview, though it was to seal the connection between them, made their mutual want of sympathy more apparent. Edward had showed the worst side of himself, and knew it. He felt even that his self-betrayal had been so great as to put him almost in his companion’s power, while at the same time Ashton had impertinently interposed in the family affairs (a point upon which Edward was as susceptible as anyone) by what he had permitted himself to say about Hester. Ashton, on the other hand, whose temper in a way was generous and easy, regarded the fortunate but ungrateful possessor of Catherine Vernon’s sympathies with an indignant astonishment. To have been so taken up by such a woman, to have her affection, her confidence, her unbounded approbation and trust, and to so repay her! It was incredible, and the fellow was⁠—Should he fling up all his pretence at sympathy with this cub, and go off at once, rather abandoning the possible advantage than consenting to ally himself with such a being? This was the point at which they stood for a moment; but beside the pull of mutual interest how were they ever to explain the sudden breach, should they follow their mutual inclinations and make one? It would be necessary to say something, and what could be said? and then there lay before Edward a world of fabulous gain, of sudden wealth, of a hundred excitements to which Roland seemed to hold the key; and before Roland the consciousness that not only the advantage of having Edward, but a whole population of eager country people ready to put their money into his hands, and give him such power of immediate action as he had scarcely dreamt of, depended upon his self-restraint. Accordingly the sole evidence of their absolute distrust and dislike of each other, was this mutual look, exchanged just before they entered upon the closest relations of mutual aid.</p>
			<p>It was a curious scene for such a beginning. The solitude of the country road was complete; there was no one to interrupt them. Although they were in the freedom of the open air, and subject to be overtaken by any passerby, yet the Sunday stillness was so intense that they might have been in the most secret retirement on earth. Had they been seated together in Edward’s room at home, a hundred disturbances were possible. Servants can never be shut out; if it is only to mend the fire they will appear in the middle of the most private conference. And Catherine herself, all unconscious that her presence was disagreeable, might have come to the door to summon them, or perhaps even to bring them, with her own kind hands, the cups of tea which in his heart Edward loathed as one of the signs of his slavery. They were the drink of bondage⁠—those poor cups that never inebriate. He hated even the fragrance of them⁠—the little steams ascending. Thank Heaven no one could bring him tea out upon the high road! The chill outer air, the faint scent of mossy damp and decay, the dim atmosphere without a sparkle in it, the absolute quiet, would have better suited confidences of a different description. But if business is not sentimental it is at least so urgent and engrossing, that it becomes indifferent to circumstances. The do-nothing calm of the Sunday closed curiously around the group; their rustling papers and eager countenances brought the strangest interruption of restless life into the almost dead and blank quiet. The season, the weather, the hour, the brown quiescent fields in which for the only moment of the year no mystery of growth was going on, but only a silent waiting for the seeds and the spring; this day of leisure when everything was at rest, all the surrounding circumstances united to throw into full relief the strange centre to the landscape⁠—the two figures which brought a sharp interest of life into this still-breathing atmosphere, and waiting stagnation, and Sunday calm.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
