<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXI: Business and Love</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-31" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXI</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Business and Love</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Roland had but a few days to spend at Redborough, where he came on the footing of an intimate friend and relation, sought and courted on all hands. His time was already portioned out among the Vernons before he came to pay his respects to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John and her daughter, though that was on the morning after his arrival. At a still earlier hour Emma had rushed in very tearful and dejected to beg Hester to intercede for her that she might not go away.</p>
			<p>“If I go now <em>he</em> may never speak at all,” Emma said. “I am sure I did everything I could last night to bring it on. I told him Roland had come for me, that he couldn’t do without me any longer; and if you could only have seen him, Hester! he grew quite white, poor fellow, and his eyes as big as saucers! I don’t believe it is his fault. It must be his people; so often, when things are going just as you wish, their people will interfere. I am sure he is quite miserable. And if he doesn’t speak now, I dare say he will never speak.”</p>
			<p>“How can you talk as if it were a matter of business?” cried Hester; “if he cares for you he is sure to ‘speak,’ as you call it. And as for bringing it on⁠—”</p>
			<p>“But, of course, it is a matter of business,” said Emma, “and very important business too. What can be so important for a girl as settling? It is all very well for you to talk, but I am the youngest, and I have no fixed home, and I must think of myself. If he comes forward it makes all the difference to me. Why, Roland and everybody will think twice as much of me if I have an offer. Hester, there’s a dear, do persuade Roland to let me stay. He doesn’t want me a bit, that’s all talk; he is just as happy without me. Perhaps he will tell you they have had enough of me here; but they don’t say so, and you’re not bound to go and inquire into people’s feelings if they don’t say so. I do believe grandpapa is tired of having me, but he will never turn me out; and when it is so essential to my best interests! Hester, I think you might have a little fellow-feeling. There’s Edward Vernon, I’m sure you would be more comfortable if he were to⁠—”</p>
			<p>Hester turned upon her indiscreet companion with a blaze of indignation. The fact that there was truth in it made it doubly odious. Her whole frame trembled with angry shame. She threw up her hand with an impatient gesture, which frightened and silenced Emma, but which Hester herself afterwards felt to be a sort of appeal to her forbearance⁠—the establishment of a kind of confidence.</p>
			<p>“What is that about Edward Vernon?” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John, whose tranquil ear had caught something, naturally of that part of the conversation which it was most expedient she should not hear.</p>
			<p>Emma paused, and consulted Hester with her eyes, who, however, averted her countenance and would not ask forbearance. A rapid debate ensued in Emma’s mind. What is the use, she asked herself, of having a mother if you cannot tell her everything, and get her to help you? But on the other hand, if Hester did not wish it spoken of she did not dare to oppose an auxiliary who might be of so much service to her. So she answered carelessly⁠—</p>
			<p>“Oh, nothing! but don’t you think, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Vernon, you who know the world, that for a girl to go away just when a gentleman is coming to the point, is a great pity? And just as likely as not nothing may ever come of it if her people interfere like this and drag her away.”</p>
			<p>“My dear,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John, astonished, though mollified by the compliment to her knowledge of the world, “I cannot call to mind that I have ever heard such a question discussed before.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, perhaps not⁠—not in general society; but when we are all women together, and a kind of relations, I am sure it is only charity to wish that a girl like me might get settled. And when you have had an offer you take such a different position, even with your own people. I want Hester to ask Roland to let me stay.”</p>
			<p>“Hester! but why Hester? If you wish it I will speak to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ashton⁠—or your grandparents would be more suitable,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John said.</p>
			<p>And it was at this moment that Roland himself came in to pay his respects. When he had said everything that was polite⁠—nay, more than polite, ingratiating and devoted, as if in a subdued and reverential way he was paying his court to the mother rather than the daughter⁠—he contrived to make his way to where Hester sat apart, working with great but spasmodic energy, and not yet recovered from the ferment into which Emma had plunged her. “I scarcely saw you last night,” he said.</p>
			<p>“There were so many people to see,” Hester replied, with a cloudy smile, without lifting her eyes.</p>
			<p>“Yes, there were a great many people. And tomorrow night, I hear, at the Merridews⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I am not going.”</p>
			<p>“No? I thought I should have been able to see a little of you there. A ballroom is good for that, that one⁠—I mean, two⁠—may be alone in it now and then⁠—and there were many things I wanted to say. But I thought you did go.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, often; but I am tired of it!” cried Hester. “It is too much; one wants something more than folly in one’s life.”</p>
			<p>“This is not folly,” he said, looking round at the quiet little room, the tranquil lady by the fire, the work at which Hester’s hands were so busy. She was seated near the side window which looked out upon the road.</p>
			<p>“No; this is dullness⁠—this is nothing,” she said; “not living at all, but only going on because one cannot help it.”</p>
			<p>“I suppose, on the whole, the greater part of life is that; but you, with the power to make others happy, with so much before you⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I am sure the life that I know is all that,” cried Hester; “we are here, we don’t know why, we cannot get out of it, we must go on with it. It is a necessity to live, and prepare your dinner every day and mend your clothes, not because you wish to do so, but because you can’t help yourself. And then the only relief to it is folly.”</p>
			<p>“Don’t call an innocent little dance folly, with all its opportunities. If it gave me the chance of a long quiet talk⁠—with you.”</p>
			<p>“If that is not folly, it is nonsense,” Hester said, with a laugh, not unmoved by the tone, not unsubdued by the eyes.</p>
			<p>“You may think so, but I don’t. I have looked forward to it for so long. If life is nothing to you here, fancy what it is to me in the Stock Exchange.”</p>
			<p>“I have no doubt it is very interesting to you. It is something to do: it is change, and thought, and risk, and all that one wants.”</p>
			<p>“That is what Edward Vernon says,” said Roland. “He, too, finds life monotonous⁠—I suppose because he has everything he wishes for.”</p>
			<p>“Has he everything he wishes for?” said Hester, with a catch of her breath, and a sudden glance up with keen, questioning eyes. The next moment she bent her head again over her work. “What I want is not dancing,” she said.</p>
			<p>“It is work, according to the fashion of young ladies. You don’t know when you are well off. You have always wanted work,” said Roland, “and barbarous parents will not let you. You want to go and teach wretched little children, and earn a little miserable money. You to be wasted on that! Ah! you have something a great deal better to do.”</p>
			<p>“What?” said Hester, raising her eyes and fixing them upon him. “I should like, not that, but to do as Catherine Vernon did,” she cried, lighting up in every line of her animated countenance. “I should like to step in when ruin was coming and prop it up on my shoulders as she did, and meet the danger, and overcome it⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I thought you hated Catherine Vernon,” Roland cried.</p>
			<p>“I never said so,” cried Hester; and then, after a pause, “but if I did, what does that matter? I should like to do what she did. Something of one’s own free will⁠—something that no one can tell you or require you to do⁠—which is not even your duty bound down upon you. Something voluntary, even dangerous⁠—” She paused again, with a smile and a blush at her own vehemence, and shook her head. “That is exactly what I shall never have it in my power to do.”</p>
			<p>“I hope not, indeed, if it is dangerous,” said Roland, with all that eyes could say to make the words eloquent. “Pardon me; but don’t you think that is far less than what you have in your power? You can make others do: you can inspire (isn’t that what Lord Lytton says?) and reward. That is a little high-flown, perhaps. But there is nothing a man might not do, with you to encourage him. You make me wish to be a hero.”</p>
			<p>He laughed, but Hester did not laugh. She gave him a keen look, in which there was a touch of disdain. “Do you really think,” she said, “that the charm of inspiring, as you call it, is what any reasonable creature would prefer to doing? To make somebody else a hero rather than be a hero yourself? Women would need to be disinterested indeed if they like that best. I don’t see it. Besides, we are not in the days of chivalry. What could you be inspired to do⁠—make better bargains on your Stock Exchange? and reward⁠—Oh, that is not the way it is looked at nowadays. You think it is you who⁠—” Here Hester paused, with a rising colour, “I will not say what I was going to say,” she said.</p>
			<p>“What you were going to say was cruel. Besides, it was not true. I must know best, being on the side of the slandered. A man who is worth calling a man can have but one opinion on that subject.”</p>
			<p>Hester looked at him again with a serious criticism, which embarrassed Roland. She was not regarding the question lightly, as a mere subject of provocative talk, but was surveying him as if to read how far he was true and how far fictitious. Before he could say anything she shook her head with a little sigh.</p>
			<p>“Besides,” she said, “it was not a hero I was thinking of. If anybody, it was Catherine Vernon.”</p>
			<p>“Whom you don’t like. These women, who step out of their sphere, they may do much to be respected, they may be of great use; but⁠—”</p>
			<p>“You mean that men don’t like them,” said Hester, with a smile; “but then women do; and, after all, we are the half of creation⁠—or more.”</p>
			<p>“Women do! Oh, no; that is a mistake. Let us ask the company present⁠—your mother and my sister.”</p>
			<p>Hester put out her hand to stop him. “That goes far deeper,” she said, with a rising blush. What did she mean? Roland was sufficiently versed in all the questions of this kind, which are discussed in idleness to promote flirtation. But he did not know why she should blush so deeply, or why her forehead should contract when he claimed his sister and her mother together as representatives of women. They were so, better than Hester herself was. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John represented all the timid opinions and obstinate prejudices of weakness; all that is gently conventional and stereotyped in that creature conventionally talked about as Woman from the beginning of time; while the other represented that other, vulgarer type of feminine character which, without being either strong enough or generous enough to strike out a new belief, makes a practical and cynical commentary upon the old one, and considers man as the natural provider of woman’s comfort, and, therefore, indispensable, to be secured as any other source of income and ease ought to be secured. Hester was wounded and ashamed that her mother should be classed with Emma, but could say nothing against it; and she was moved with a high indignation to think that Roland was right. But he had not the least idea what she could mean, and she had no mind to enlighten him. Their conversation came to an end accordingly; and the sound of the others came in.</p>
			<p>“I don’t see why I should go away,” said Emma. “For, whatever he may choose to say, Roland doesn’t want me, not a bit. Elizabeth is a very good cook, and that’s all a man thinks of. I couldn’t do him any good at home, and he doesn’t like my acquaintances. A girl can’t live without friends, can she, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John? If you are to have any amusement at all, you must be getting it when you’re about twenty, that is the time. But men never care: they go out, and they have their own friends separate, and they never think of you. But here, without bothering him a bit, I have lots of nice people, and grandmamma has never said she was tired of me. Then why should he take me away?”</p>
			<p>“There is no reason for talking of that just now at all,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John politely, “for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Roland is not going away himself as yet.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, he cannot stay long,” cried Emma, “he oughtn’t to stay; he has got his business⁠—not like me that have nothing to call me. Edward Vernon wouldn’t like it a bit if Roland stayed away from his business.”</p>
			<p>“I am always hearing the name of Edward Vernon,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John; “you mentioned it to Hester just now. What has he to do with Hester or with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Roland’s business? Though Catherine Vernon thinks so much of him, he is not one of my favourites. I like his cousin Harry better.”</p>
			<p>“And so do I,” Roland said.</p>
			<p>They all looked at him with surprise, and Hester with a sudden increase of colour. She was angry, though she could not have told why.</p>
			<p>“He is very hot and eager in business,” Roland said. “I suppose I ought to like him the better for that. And he has a keen eye too; but it goes to his head, and that is what one never should allow one’s business to do.”</p>
			<p>“Ah!” cried <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John, “if it can be prevented, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Roland. That was what happened to my dear husband. He could not be cool, as, I suppose, it is right to be. But sometimes, don’t you think one likes a person better for not calculating too much, for letting himself be carried away?”</p>
			<p>Roland looked more dark than he had ever been seen to look before, and responded vaguely, “Perhaps,” with a face that had no doubtfulness in it.</p>
			<p>“Why should he not be hot and eager?” cried Hester; “I understand that very well. Everything is quiet here. A man, when he gets out of this still atmosphere, wants a little excitement, and to fling himself into it.”</p>
			<p>“Ah!” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John, “that is what your poor father always said.”</p>
			<p>But Roland had never looked so unsympathetic. “A man may lose his head in love or in war, or in adventure, or in pleasure, but he must not lose it on the Stock Exchange,” he said; then, looking up, with an uneasy laugh, “I need not warn you, ladies, need I? for you will never lose your heads about shares and premiums. I am glad to think I am a very steady fellow myself.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, steady!” cried <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John, alarmed. “I hope, I am sure, they are all <em>quite</em> steady. I never heard a word to the contrary. It would be dreadful for poor Catherine; after all, though we are not very good friends⁠—not such good friends as I should wish to be⁠—it would be dreadful; for if Edward was not steady⁠—Oh, I hope, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Roland, you are mistaken. I hope that it is not so.”</p>
			<p>“He means a steady head, mother; there is no question of anything else,” said Hester, very red and troubled. Her secret consciousness in respect to Edward made life and conversation very difficult for her: she could not bear any animadversion upon him, though in her own heart she made many; and at the same time she could not defend him openly. What was he to her more than Harry was? The same far-off cousin⁠—old friend: not so much, indeed, as Harry, for all the world knew that Harry would fain have established another relationship had it seemed good in Hester’s eyes.</p>
			<p>“I meant nothing against his morals,” Roland said.</p>
			<p>“That is a great relief to my mind,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John, “for Catherine Vernon is a good woman, though she and I have never been great friends; and it is a terrible thing to set your heart upon a child and have him turn out badly. There is nothing so heartrending as that. One of my mother’s sisters, Aunt Eliza, of whom you have heard me talk, Hester, had a son⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Oh, mamma, I don’t think we want to hear about that.”</p>
			<p>“And you were coming out for a walk,” said Emma, who saw that her own affairs were slipping out of notice. “Didn’t she say she would come out for a walk? And if we are going we had better not be long about it, for the days are so short at this time of the year.”</p>
			<p>“Put on your hat, Hester; it will do you good. You change colour so I do not know what to make of it,” her mother said.</p>
			<p>“And so do I now,” cried Emma; “they always tell me it is indigestion, but that is not a nice reason to give when people think you are blushing about something. It is very disagreeable. Mine comes on often after dinner when we dine early, and all the afternoon I am just a fright! It is a blessing it goes off towards evening when one is seeing people. Roland, you must take Hester and me into Redborough. I want to buy some gloves, and I dare say so does she, for the Merridews tonight.”</p>
			<p>“She is not going to the Merridews,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John, with a plaintive sound in her voice.</p>
			<p>“Oh, she told us something about that, but I didn’t believe it was true. Why shouldn’t she go to the Merridews?⁠—she that is always made so much of, just like the sister of the house. If I had that position I never should miss one evening; and, indeed, I never have since I had my first invitation. Grandpapa did not like it at first, but of course he got reconciled. Oh, here you are, Hester; how quickly you do dress! To be sure, you never put on anything but that peacoat of yours. But I don’t like drawing on my gloves as I go out, as you do; I like to put them on carefully, and smooth them, and button them up.”</p>
			<p>“You are always so tidy,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John, with a faint sigh. She could not but feel it would be an advantage if Hester, though so much superior, would get some of Emma’s ways. She was so neat: never a hair out of order, or a shoe-tie loose. Whereas, now and then, in her own child, there were imperfections. But she smiled as she looked after them, going out to the door to see them go. Hester, with her varying complexion (which had nothing to do with her digestion), threw up her head to meet the wind with a movement so vigorous, so full of grace and life, that it was a pleasure to see. The mother thought that it was pretty to watch her drawing on her gloves, though, perhaps, it would have been tidier to button them carefully as Emma did, before she came downstairs; but then in those days gloves had few buttons and were easily managed. As soon as they had gone out of the gate of the Vernonry, Emma gave Hester a significant look, and even a nudge, if it must be told, and begged them to walk on while she ran in for an umbrella which she had forgotten. “For it always rains when one hasn’t an umbrella,” she said. It cost Hester an effort to remember what the look and the nudge meant. Then she laughed as she watched the schemer down to Captain Morgan’s door.</p>
			<p>“Why do you want to take Emma away?” she said. “She seems to be happy here.”</p>
			<p>“Do you think she makes the old people happier? They don’t say anything, but she seems to me to worry my old grandfather. I don’t want to take her away. She has her little schemes on hand, no doubt, and means to settle or something; but I cannot let her tire out the old people. They are part of my religion,” Roland said. This, too, was meant as provocation to draw Hester on to discuss the question of religion, perhaps to an attempt to convert him to sounder views, which is a very fruitful method. He looked at her with a pleased defiance in his eyes. But Hester was not to be drawn out on this subject. She had no dogmatic teaching in her, and did not feel qualified to discuss a man’s religion. Instead, she returned to the subject of their previous discussion, herself abandoning Emma’s cause.</p>
			<p>“What do you do on the Stock Exchange?” she said.</p>
			<p>“That is a tremendous question. I don’t know how to answer it. I should have to give you a lecture upon shares, and companies, and all the vicissitudes of the Funds.”</p>
			<p>“These, I suppose, are your material, just as written things are the material of a newspaper editor. I understand that,” said Hester, “what I want to know is what you do.”</p>
			<p>“We buy and we sell,” he said, with a laugh. “We are no better than any shopkeeper. We buy a thing when it is cheap, and hold it till it becomes dear, and then we sell it again.”</p>
			<p>“But who,” said Hester, with a little scorn, “is so silly as to buy things <em>when they are dear</em>? Is it to oblige you? I thought that was against political economy⁠—and everything of that kind,” she added vaguely. It was not the subject Roland would have chosen, but out of that, too, he could draw the thread of talk.</p>
			<p>“Political economy is not infallible,” he said. “We praise our wares so, and represent their excellence so warmly, that there comes a moment when everybody wishes to buy them. Sometimes they deserve the commendations we bestow, sometimes they⁠—don’t. But in either case people buy. And then political economy comes in, and the demand being great increases the value; so that sometimes we make a nice little bit of profit without spending a penny.”</p>
			<p>Hester looked at him with a blank face. She knew nothing about these mysteries. She shook her head.</p>
			<p>“I don’t understand business,” she said; “but how can you buy without spending a penny? I wish I knew how to do that.”</p>
			<p>“I should like to do it for you,” said Roland, with a look that said still more; for even stockbroking will do as a vehicle for flirtation. “I should like to buy you a quantity of Circassians, for instance, exactly at the right moment, neither too soon nor too late, and sell them next day, perhaps, when the market had turned, and hand you over a thousand pounds or two which you should have made without, as I said, spending a penny. That would make the profession romantic, poetic, if one could conduct such operations for <em>you</em>. Probably I shall put that money into the pocket of some bilious city person who does not want it, instead of into your fair hands⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Which do. I don’t know if they are fair hands, but they want it certainly. A thousand or two! enough to make people comfortable for life. And what are Circassians?” Hester asked.</p>
			<p>“They are stock. You must accept certain words as symbols, or we shall never make it clear. And my business is to watch the market for you, to catch the moment when the tide is turning. There is a great deal of excitement in it.”</p>
			<p>“And is that how Edward loses his head?”</p>
			<p>She spoke in a low tone, and Roland stopped suddenly in what he was about to say, and turned upon her with real surprise. After this he put on an air of mock mortification⁠—mock, yet not without a mixture of the true.</p>
			<p>“Is it for this,” he said, “that I have been devising delicate operations for you, and explaining all my mysteries? to find you at the end not in the least interested in my work or in your possible fortune, but considering everything in the light of Edward Vernon? Acknowledge that this is hard upon me.”</p>
			<p>“I was thinking only,” said Hester, with again that sudden flush of colour, “of what you said, that Edward lost his head. It is not much wonder if what you say can be. He would like to be rich; he would like to be free. He would prefer to get a fortune of his own, especially if it can be done that way, rather than to wait for years and years, till he has made money, or till Catherine dies. That is generous, you know. He does not want to wait till she dies, as if he grudged her life. It would be terrible for her to think that he did not wish her to live as long as she could. But at the same time he wants, and so do we all, to be free.”</p>
			<p>“I am so much obliged to you for explaining Edward Vernon’s motives,” said Roland, much piqued. It was an experience he was not familiar with, to have himself forgotten and his rival expounded to him. His rival! was he his rival? In the sting of this sudden revelation of preference, Roland all but vowed that he would enter the lists in earnest and chase this Edward, this country-fellow whom she thought so much of, from the field.</p>
			<p>Hester was confused, too, when her investigation into her cousin’s mind was thus received. It was true enough; it was the problem which had interested her in the first place⁠—not directly Edward in person who was the subject of it. She had tried to explain his position to herself. Now that her interest was found out, and she discovered it to be an offence to her companion, she threw herself back instinctively on a less alarming question.</p>
			<p>“I think a great deal about Catherine,” she said.</p>
			<p>“About Catherine⁠—Cousin Catherine⁠—whom I thought you disliked with all your heart?”</p>
			<p>“You may be astonished, but it is true. I think a great deal about her. I think of her, after being kind to everybody⁠—for now that I am grown up I begin to understand, she has been very kind to everybody; not loving them, which takes the grace out of it⁠—but yet kind, after being so kind, to be left alone with nobody caring for her, and perhaps the one she loves best expecting when she will die. No,” said Hester, “I am glad Edward loses his head⁠—that is what he is thinking of. Not to wait or feel as if he would like by an hour to shorten her life, but only for himself, like a man, to get free. I am very glad of it,” she added hotly, with another overwhelming blush, “for Catherine’s sake.”</p>
			<p>Roland was bewildered and doubtful what to think, for truth was so strong in Hester that it was hard to believe she was sheltering herself behind a fiction. But he was very much mortified too.</p>
			<p>“I don’t think,” he said, plaintively, “that I want to talk either of Cousin Catherine or of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Edward, whom she thinks a great deal more of than he deserves⁠—as, perhaps others do, too.”</p>
			<p>“And we have come on so fast and forgotten Emma!” cried Hester, with a sense of guilt. “We ought to go back and meet her. She has been a long time getting that umbrella. Don’t you think you had better leave her with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Morgan a little longer since she likes to be here?”</p>
			<p>“I shall not disturb her if⁠—you wish her to stay,” he meant to say if she wishes to stay, but changed his phrase and gave it emphasis, with a look of devotion. “If I thought you had any regard for my poor little sister how glad it would make me. It would do her so much good; it would alter her way of looking at things.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, you must not think,” cried Hester, meaning, like him, to say one thing and saying another, “that Emma is likely to be influenced by me. She knows what she thinks much better than I do⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ashton, would it not turn one’s head and make one unfit for one’s other business if one was trying to make money in <em>that</em> way?”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps,” Roland said.</p>
			<p>“Has it not that effect upon you?”</p>
			<p>“But it is my business. I don’t act for myself. I am tempted sometimes to do things I ought not to do, and sometimes I fall. Even you, if you were tempted, would sometimes fall. You would dabble in Circassians, you would find a new company too much for your virtue; shares going today for next to nothing but sure to be at a premium next week⁠—if the bubble doesn’t burst in the meantime.”</p>
			<p>“And does it always happen that the bubbles burst?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, not always; but after you have done with them you don’t care what becomes of them. I never thought I should have had you for half an hour all to myself, and talked of business the whole time. It is incredible; and there is that little Emma running this way as if she thought we were inconsolable for the loss of her. I wanted to tell you how much I have been thinking of all our talks since I have been in my little house alone. Did you never think of coming to London? The very feeling of being in a place so full of life and action, and thinking, makes your veins thrill. I think you would like to be there. There is so much going on. And then I might have the hope of seeing you sometimes. That is one for you and two for myself.”</p>
			<p>“We could not afford it,” said Hester, colouring again. “I think I should like it. I am not sure. To look on and see everybody doing a great deal would be intolerable if one had nothing to do.”</p>
			<p>“What are you talking of?” cried Emma coming up breathless. “I couldn’t find that umbrella. I went up and down into every room in the house, and then I found I had left it in your drawing-room, Hester, and your mamma looked up when I went in, and said, ‘Back already!’ I think she must have been dozing, for we could not possibly have gone to Redborough and back in this time, could we, Roland? You two looked so comfortable by yourselves I had half a mind not to come at all: for you know two’s company but three’s none. And then I thought you didn’t know my number, and Roland would never have had the thought to bring me my gloves. But don’t be afraid, I dare say I shall pick up someone on the way.”</p>
			<p>They walked into the town after this, and bought Emma’s gloves. Hester could not be tempted into a similar purchase, nor could she be persuaded to go to the Merridews. And she resisted all Roland’s attempts to make himself agreeable, even after Emma encountered young Reginald Merridew, who was glad enough to help her to buy her gloves. Though it was not many months since she had seen him, Hester felt that she had outgrown Roland. His eyes were very fine, but they did not affect her any more. He brought no light with him into the problems of life, but only another difficulty, which it was more and more hard to solve. A sort of instinctive consciousness that something was going to happen seemed in the air about her. All was still, and everything going on in its calm habitual way. There were not even any heavings and groanings, like those that warn the surrounding country before a volcano bursts forth. Nevertheless, this girl, who had been so long a spectator, pushed aside from the action about her, but with the keen sight of injured pride and wounded feeling, seeing the secret thread of meaning that ran through everything, felt premonitions, she could not tell how, in the heated air, and through the domestic calm.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
