<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VI: Neighbours and Relations</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Neighbours and Relations</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>In the morning, the inhabitants of the Vernonry were to be seen a little before or after noon, according to the season, appearing and disappearing in the immediate neighbourhood of their house. It was a little community perfectly at leisure, called out by no work in the morning, returning with no more punctuality than pleased them. As a matter of fact they were exceedingly punctual, coming and going as by clockwork, supporting their otherwise limp existence by a severe mechanism of rule. Those who have least to do, are often most rigorous in thus measuring themselves out; it gives a certain sense of something real in their lives. It was a little after eleven when <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mildmay Vernon appeared. His residence was in the west wing, nearest to the pool and the trees, and he thought it was probably owing to the proximity of the water that his rheumatism troubled him so much in winter. It did not trouble him at this fine season, but he had the habit of leaning on his stick and talking in a querulous voice. He came out with his newspaper to a little summerhouse where the heat was tempered by the foliage of a great lime. He had very good taste; he liked the flicker of the sunshine which came through those green-silken leaves, and the shelter was very grateful when the sun was hot. The worst of it was that the summerhouse was not in his portion of the common grounds, and the ladies, to whom it ought to have belonged, and to whom it was so convenient to do their work in, resented his constant presence. In winter, he seated himself always on a sunny bench which was in front of the windows now belonging to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John, but she was not as yet aware of this peculiarity. The Miss Vernon-Ridgways occupied the space between <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mildmay’s house and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John’s. They were not in the direct line, and they felt that they were treated accordingly, the best of everything being appropriated to those whom Catherine Vernon, who was so proud of her name, considered nearest to the family stock. These ladies were convinced that the blood of the Ridgways had much enriched the liquid that meandered through the veins of the Vernons; but in Catherine Vernon’s presence they kept silence as to this belief. The rooms in the wings were much the best, they thought, and they had even proposed an exchange to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mildmay when he complained of being so close to the pool. But he had only grinned and had not accepted; he knew better. Of course he would have grumbled if he had been lodged in Windsor Castle, the ladies said; but he knew very well in his heart that he had been preferred to the best place. On the other side of the house, towards the road, lived <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Reginald Vernon, the young widow of an officer, with her four children, of whom everybody complained, and an old couple, in reality not Vernons at all, but relations of Catherine’s mother who were looked down upon by the entire community, and had clearly no business in the Vernonry. The old gentleman, Captain Morgan, had been in the navy, and therefore ought to have been the equal of anyone. But the people on the road side kept themselves very much to themselves; the aristocracy lived on the garden front. When <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John Vernon made her appearance in her deep mourning, there was a great deal of excitement about the place. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mildmay put down his paper and came out, bowing, to the door of the summerhouse.</p>
			<p>“Between relations I do not know if any ceremony of introduction is necessary,” he said. “It gives me great pleasure to welcome you back to England. Poor John and I were once great friends. I hope you will allow me to consider myself at once an old acquaintance.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, how thankful I shall be for someone to speak to!” cried <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John. “Though my family were of this county, I seem to have lost sight of everyone that used to know me. A great many changes happen when one has been thirty years away.”</p>
			<p>“Poor John! I suppose he never came back to this country again?” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mildmay said, with sympathetic curiosity, and that air of knowing all about it which is sometimes so offensive; but <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John was simple-minded. She was not even displeased by the undertone of confidential understanding.</p>
			<p>“Never! it would have broken his heart; what was left to him to come for? He always said that when ladies meddle with business everything goes wrong. But, dear me, I oughtn’t to say so here,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John added, with a little panic, looking round.</p>
			<p>“Why?⁠—you need not be afraid of expressing your sentiments, my dear lady, before me. I have the greatest respect for the ladies⁠—where would we without them? ‘Oh, woman, in our hours of ease,’ <abbr>etc.</abbr>⁠—you know. But I think that mixed up with business they are entirely out of their place. It changes the natural relations⁠—it creates a false position⁠—”</p>
			<p>“John always thought so. But then I was so silly⁠—so dreadfully silly⁠—about business; and he thought that women should all be like me.”</p>
			<p>“That is certainly the kind of woman that is most attractive to men,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mildmay, with a gallant bow; “and in my time ladies thought much of that. I hope, however, that you will like this retirement, and be happy here. It is very retired, you see⁠—nothing to disturb us⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Oh, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mildmay, I dare say I shall do very well,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John, putting her handkerchief to her eyes; “but seeing <em>that</em>” (she waved her hand towards the front of the White House in the distance) “from the window, and knowing every day how things are going on at the bank, and all the old associations, I cannot be expected to be very happy. That was not thought of when I came here.”</p>
			<p>“My dear lady!” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mildmay said, soothingly; and then he saw his way to inflicting another pinprick upon this bleeding heart so easily laid open to him. “I suppose you know that Catherine has put her nephew Harry and his sister⁠—he is no more her nephew than I am⁠—one of Gilbert Vernon’s boys: but she took a fancy to him⁠—in the White House? It belongs to her now, like everything else in the neighbourhood. Almost the whole of Redborough is in her hands.”</p>
			<p>“Her nephew?” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John, faintly, “but she has no nephew⁠—she was an only child. My Hester is nearer to her than anyone else.” Then she paused, and added with conscious magnanimity, “Since I cannot have it, it doesn’t matter to me who has got it. We must make ourselves as contented as we can⁠—Hester and I.”</p>
			<p>It was at this moment that the two ladies appeared who considered the summerhouse their special property. They were tall women with pronounced features and a continual smile⁠—in dresses which had a way of looking scanty, and were exactly the same. Their necks were long and their noses large, both which characteristics they held to be evidences of family and condition. They followed each other, one always a step in advance of the other with a certain pose of their long necks and turn of their shoulders which made some people think of the flight of two long-necked birds. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mildmay Vernon, who pretended to some scholarship, called them the Cranes of Ibycus. They arrived thus at the peaceful spot all chequered with morning light and shade, as with a swoop of wings.</p>
			<p>“Dear lady!” said Miss Matilda, “we should have waited till we could make a formal call and requested the pleasure of making your acquaintance as we ought; but when we saw you in our summerhouse, we felt sure that you did not understand the distribution of the place, and we hurried out to say that we are delighted to see you in it, and <em>quite</em> glad that you should use it as much as ever you please.”</p>
			<p>“Oh!” cried <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John, much disturbed, “I am so sorry if I have intruded. I had not the least idea⁠—”</p>
			<p>“<em>That</em> we were sure you had not⁠—for everybody knows that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John Vernon is a lady,” said the other. “It is awkward to have no one to introduce us, but we must just introduce each other. Miss Martha Vernon-Ridgway, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Vernon; and I am Matilda,” said the spokeswoman, with a curtsey. “We are very glad to see you here.”</p>
			<p>At this <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John made her curtsey too, but being unready, found nothing to say: for she could not be supposed to be glad to see them, as everybody knew the sad circumstances in which she had returned to her former home: and she seated herself again after her curtsey, wishing much that Hester was with her. Hester had a happy knack of either knowing or suggesting something to say.</p>
			<p>“We hope you will find yourself comfortable,” said the two ladies, who by dint of always beginning to speak together had the air of making their remarks in common; but Miss Matilda had better wind and a firmer disposition than her sister, and always carried the day. “You are lucky in having the end house, which has all the fresh air. I am sure we do not grudge you anything, but it always makes us feel how we are boxed up; that is our house between the wings. It is monotonous to see nothing but the garden⁠—but we don’t complain.”</p>
			<p>“I am sure I am very sorry,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John began to say.</p>
			<p>“Your favourable opinion of the end houses is very complimentary,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mildmay. “I wish it were founded on fact. My windows look into the pool and draw all the miasma out of it. When I have a fire I feel it come in. But I say nothing. What would be the good of it? We are not here only to please ourselves. Beggars should not be choosers.”</p>
			<p>“I hope, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mildmay Vernon, that you will speak for yourself,” said the sisters. “We do not consider that such an appellation applies to us. We are not obliged, I beg to say,” Miss Matilda added, “to live anywhere that does not suit us. If we come here as a favour to Catherine Vernon, who makes such a point of having all her relations about her, it is not that we are beggars, or anything of the sort.”</p>
			<p>“Dear, dear me!” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John, clasping her hands, “I hope nobody thinks that is the case. For my poor dear husband’s sake, and for Hester’s sake, I could never submit⁠—; Catherine offered the house out of kindness⁠—nothing but that.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, nothing but that,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mildmay Vernon, with a sneer.</p>
			<p>“Nothing at all but that,” said the Miss Vernon-Ridgways. “She said to us, I am sure, that it would be a favour to herself⁠—a personal favour. Don’t you remember, Martha? Nothing else would induce us, as you may suppose, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John⁠—my sister and me, who have many friends and resources⁠—to put up with a little poky place⁠—the worst, quite the worst, here. But dear Catherine is very lonely. She is not a person, you know, that can do with everybody. You must understand her before you can get on with her. Shouldn’t you say so? And she is perhaps, you know, a little too fond of her own way. People who can’t make allowances as relatives do, are apt not to⁠—like her, in short. And it is such a great standby for her⁠—such a comfort, to have us here.”</p>
			<p>“I should have thought she was very⁠—independent,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John, faltering a little. She did not even venture to risk an opinion; but something she was obliged to say. “But I can scarcely say I know her,” she added, anxiously, “for it is thirty years since I was at Redborough, and people change so much. She was young then.”</p>
			<p>“Young! she must have been nearly forty. Her character must have been what one may call formed by that time,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mildmay; “but I know what you mean. Our dear Catherine whom we are all so fond of⁠—”</p>
			<p>“You are quite right,” said Miss Matilda, emphatically, “<em>quite</em> right, though perhaps you mean something different, for gentlemen are always so strange. We <em>are</em> very fond of dear Catherine. All the more that so many people misunderstand her, and take wrong ideas. I think indeed that you require to be a relation, to enter into the peculiarities of the case, and take everything into consideration, before you can do dear Catherine justice. She is so good, but under such a <em>brusque</em> exterior. Though she never <em>means</em> to hurt anyone’s feelings⁠—that I am certain of.”</p>
			<p>“Oh <em>never</em>!” cried <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mildmay, with mock enthusiasm, lifting up his hands and eyes.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John looked, as each spoke, from one to the other with a great deal of perplexity. It had seemed to her simple mind at first that it was with a real enthusiasm that their general benefactress was being discussed; but by this time she had begun to feel the influence of the undertone. She was foolish, but there was no rancour in her mind. So gentle a little shaft as that which she had herself shot, in vindication, as she thought of her husband, rather than as assailing his successor, she might be capable of; but systematic disparagement puzzled the poor lady. She looked first at the Miss Vernon-Ridgways, and then at <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mildmay Vernon, with a bewildered look, trying to make out what they meant. And then she was moved to make to the conversation a contribution of her own⁠—</p>
			<p>“I am afraid my little girl made a sad mistake last night,” she said. “Catherine was so kind as to come to see me⁠—without ceremony⁠—and I had gone to bed.”</p>
			<p>“That was so like Catherine!” the Miss Vernon-Ridgways cried. “Now anybody else would have come next day at soonest to let you have time to rest and get over your journey. But that is just what she would be sure to do. Impatience is a great defect in her character, it must be allowed. She wanted you to be delighted, and to tell her how beautiful everything was. It must be confessed it is a little tiresome. You must praise everything, and tell her you are <em>so</em> comfortable. One wouldn’t like it in anybody else.”</p>
			<p>“But what I regret so much,” continued poor <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John, “is that Hester, my little girl, who had never heard of Catherine⁠—she is tall, but she is only fourteen, and such a child! Don’t you know she would not let her in? I am afraid she was quite rude to her.”</p>
			<p>Here <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John’s artless story was interrupted by a series of little cheers from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mildmay, and titters from the two sisters.</p>
			<p>“Brava!” he said. “Well done!” taking away <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John’s breath; while the two ladies uttered little laughs and titterings, and exchanged glances of pleasure.</p>
			<p>“Oh, how very funny!” they cried. “Oh, what an amusing thing to happen! Dear Catherine, what a snub for her! How I wish we had been there to see.”</p>
			<p>“I should like to make acquaintance with your little Hester, my dear lady,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mildmay. “She must have a fine spirit. Our respected Cousin Catherine is only human, and we all feel that to be opposed now and then would be for her moral advantage. We flatter her ourselves, being grown-up persons: but we like to know that she encounters something now and then that will be for her good.”</p>
			<p>“I must again ask you to speak for yourself, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mildmay,” said the sisters; “flattery is not an art I am acquainted with. Dear, dear, what a sad thing for a beginning. How nervous it must have made you! and knowing that dear Catherine, though she is so generous, <em>cannot</em> forgive a jest. She has no sense of humour; it is a great pity. She will not, I fear, see the fun of it as we do.”</p>
			<p>“Do you think,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John, with a little tremor, “that she will be dreadfully angry? Hester is such a child⁠—and then, she didn’t know.”</p>
			<p>The sisters both shook their heads upon their long necks. They wished no particular harm to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John; but they would not have been sorry so to frighten her, as that she should go away as she came. And they sincerely believed Catherine to be as they represented her. Few people are capable of misrepresenting goodness in the barefaced way of saying one thing while they believe another. Most commonly they have made out of shreds and patches of observation and dislike, a fictitious figure meriting all their anger and contempt, to which they attach the unloved name. Catherine Vernon, according to their picture of her, was a woman who, being richer than they, helped them all with an ostentatious benevolence, which was her justification for humiliating them whenever she had a chance, and treating them at all times as her inferiors and pensioners. Perhaps they would themselves have done so in Catherine Vernon’s place. This at all events was the way in which they had painted her to themselves. They had grown to believe that she was all this, and to expect her to act in accordance with the character they had given her. When the sun shone into the summerhouse, and routed the little company, which happened just about the time when the meal which they called luncheon, but which to most of them was dinner, was ready, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John carried back with her to her new home a tremulous conviction that any sort of vengeance was possible. She might be turned out of this shelter, or she might be made to feel that her life was a burden. And yet when she got back to the low cool room in which Hester, doubtful of Betsey’s powers, was superintending the laying out of the table, it seemed to her, in the prospect of losing it, more desirable than it had been before. There were three windows in deep recesses, one of them with a cheerful outlook along the road that skirted the Common, in which was placed a soft, luxurious chair, which was exactly what <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John liked. Nothing could have been more grateful, coming out of the sunshine, than the coolness of this brown room, with all the little glimmers of light in the polished wainscot, and the pretty old-fashioned furniture. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John sighed as she placed herself in the chair at the window. And the smell of the dish which Betsey soon after put upon the table was very appetising. It turned out to be nicely cooked, and the table was laid with fine linen and pretty crystal and old-fashioned silver⁠—everything complete. The poor lady in her wandering and unsettled life had lost almost all this needful garniture which makes life so much more seemly and smooth. She had been used to lodging-houses, to <i xml:lang="fr">pensions</i>, greasy and public, to the vulgarity of inns; and all this daintiness and freshness charmed her with a sense of repose and personal property. She could have cried to think that it might be put in jeopardy by Hester’s childish petulance.</p>
			<p>“Oh, why did I let you persuade me to go to bed? Why didn’t I stay up⁠—I could have done it quite well⁠—and seen Catherine Vernon? Why are you so self-willed, child? I think I could be happy here, at least as happy as I can ever be now; and what if I must give it all up again for you?”</p>
			<p>“Mother, if we have to give it up, we will do better,” said Hester, a little pale; “we shall get pretty lodgings like Ruth Pinch, and I will give lessons; and it will not matter about Cousin Catherine.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, child, child, what do you know about it!” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> John said.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
